URL: https://www.gutenberg.org/files/1260/1260-0.txt
Charlotte Brontë
Jane Eyre



﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Jane Eyre, by Charlotte BrontëThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States andmost other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictionswhatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the termsof the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online atwww.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, youwill have to check the laws of the country where you are located beforeusing this eBook.Title: Jane Eyre       an AutobiographyAuthor: Charlotte BrontëRelease Date: March, 1998 [eBook #1260][Most recently updated: December 1, 2020]Language: EnglishCharacter set encoding: UTF-8Produced by: David Price*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK  JANE EYRE ***JANE EYREAN AUTOBIOGRAPHYby Charlotte Brontë_ILLUSTRATED BY F. H. TOWNSEND_LondonSERVICE & PATON5 HENRIETTA STREET1897_The Illustrations__in this Volume are the copyright of_SERVICE & PATON, _London_TOW. M. THACKERAY, ESQ.,This WorkIS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBEDBYTHE AUTHORPREFACEA preface to the first edition of “Jane Eyre” being unnecessary, I gavenone: this second edition demands a few words both of acknowledgmentand miscellaneous remark.My thanks are due in three quarters.To the Public, for the indulgent ear it has inclined to a plain talewith few pretensions.To the Press, for the fair field its honest suffrage has opened to anobscure aspirant.To my Publishers, for the aid their tact, their energy, their practicalsense and frank liberality have afforded an unknown and unrecommendedAuthor.The Press and the Public are but vague personifications for me, and Imust thank them in vague terms; but my Publishers are definite: so arecertain generous critics who have encouraged me as only large-heartedand high-minded men know how to encourage a struggling stranger; tothem, _i.e._, to my Publishers and the select Reviewers, I saycordially, Gentlemen, I thank you from my heart.Having thus acknowledged what I owe those who have aided and approvedme, I turn to another class; a small one, so far as I know, but not,therefore, to be overlooked. I mean the timorous or carping few whodoubt the tendency of such books as “Jane Eyre:” in whose eyes whateveris unusual is wrong; whose ears detect in each protest againstbigotry—that parent of crime—an insult to piety, that regent of God onearth. I would suggest to such doubters certain obvious distinctions; Iwould remind them of certain simple truths.Conventionality is not morality. Self-righteousness is not religion. Toattack the first is not to assail the last. To pluck the mask from theface of the Pharisee, is not to lift an impious hand to the Crown ofThorns.These things and deeds are diametrically opposed: they are as distinctas is vice from virtue. Men too often confound them: they should not beconfounded: appearance should not be mistaken for truth; narrow humandoctrines, that only tend to elate and magnify a few, should not besubstituted for the world-redeeming creed of Christ. There is—I repeatit—a difference; and it is a good, and not a bad action to mark broadlyand clearly the line of separation between them.The world may not like to see these ideas dissevered, for it has beenaccustomed to blend them; finding it convenient to make external showpass for sterling worth—to let white-washed walls vouch for cleanshrines. It may hate him who dares to scrutinise and expose—to rase thegilding, and show base metal under it—to penetrate the sepulchre, andreveal charnel relics: but hate as it will, it is indebted to him.Ahab did not like Micaiah, because he never prophesied good concerninghim, but evil; probably he liked the sycophant son of Chenaanahbetter; yet might Ahab have escaped a bloody death, had he but stoppedhis ears to flattery, and opened them to faithful counsel.There is a man in our own days whose words are not framed to tickledelicate ears: who, to my thinking, comes before the great ones ofsociety, much as the son of Imlah came before the throned Kings ofJudah and Israel; and who speaks truth as deep, with a power asprophet-like and as vital—a mien as dauntless and as daring. Is thesatirist of “Vanity Fair” admired in high places? I cannot tell; but Ithink if some of those amongst whom he hurls the Greek fire of hissarcasm, and over whom he flashes the levin-brand of his denunciation,were to take his warnings in time—they or their seed might yet escape afatal Rimoth-Gilead.Why have I alluded to this man? I have alluded to him, Reader, becauseI think I see in him an intellect profounder and more unique than hiscontemporaries have yet recognised; because I regard him as the firstsocial regenerator of the day—as the very master of that working corpswho would restore to rectitude the warped system of things; because Ithink no commentator on his writings has yet found the comparison thatsuits him, the terms which rightly characterise his talent. They say heis like Fielding: they talk of his wit, humour, comic powers. Heresembles Fielding as an eagle does a vulture: Fielding could stoop oncarrion, but Thackeray never does. His wit is bright, his humourattractive, but both bear the same relation to his serious genius thatthe mere lambent sheet-lightning playing under the edge of thesummer-cloud does to the electric death-spark hid in its womb. Finally,I have alluded to Mr. Thackeray, because to him—if he will accept thetribute of a total stranger—I have dedicated this second edition of“JANE EYRE.”CURRER BELL._December_ 21_st_, 1847.NOTE TO THE THIRD EDITIONI avail myself of the opportunity which a third edition of “Jane Eyre”affords me, of again addressing a word to the Public, to explain thatmy claim to the title of novelist rests on this one work alone. If,therefore, the authorship of other works of fiction has been attributedto me, an honour is awarded where it is not merited; and consequently,denied where it is justly due.This explanation will serve to rectify mistakes which may already havebeen made, and to prevent future errors.CURRER BELL._April_ 13_th_, 1848.CHAPTER IThere was no possibility of taking a walk that day. We had beenwandering, indeed, in the leafless shrubbery an hour in the morning;but since dinner (Mrs. Reed, when there was no company, dined early)the cold winter wind had brought with it clouds so sombre, and a rainso penetrating, that further outdoor exercise was now out of thequestion.I was glad of it: I never liked long walks, especially on chillyafternoons: dreadful to me was the coming home in the raw twilight,with nipped fingers and toes, and a heart saddened by the chidings ofBessie, the nurse, and humbled by the consciousness of my physicalinferiority to Eliza, John, and Georgiana Reed.The said Eliza, John, and Georgiana were now clustered round their mamain the drawing-room: she lay reclined on a sofa by the fireside, andwith her darlings about her (for the time neither quarrelling norcrying) looked perfectly happy. Me, she had dispensed from joining thegroup; saying, “She regretted to be under the necessity of keeping meat a distance; but that until she heard from Bessie, and could discoverby her own observation, that I was endeavouring in good earnest toacquire a more sociable and childlike disposition, a more attractiveand sprightly manner—something lighter, franker, more natural, as itwere—she really must exclude me from privileges intended only forcontented, happy, little children.”“What does Bessie say I have done?” I asked.“Jane, I don’t like cavillers or questioners; besides, there issomething truly forbidding in a child taking up her elders in thatmanner. Be seated somewhere; and until you can speak pleasantly, remainsilent.”A breakfast-room adjoined the drawing-room, I slipped in there. Itcontained a bookcase: I soon possessed myself of a volume, taking carethat it should be one stored with pictures. I mounted into thewindow-seat: gathering up my feet, I sat cross-legged, like a Turk;and, having drawn the red moreen curtain nearly close, I was shrined indouble retirement.Folds of scarlet drapery shut in my view to the right hand; to the leftwere the clear panes of glass, protecting, but not separating me fromthe drear November day. At intervals, while turning over the leaves ofmy book, I studied the aspect of that winter afternoon. Afar, itoffered a pale blank of mist and cloud; near a scene of wet lawn andstorm-beat shrub, with ceaseless rain sweeping away wildly before along and lamentable blast.I returned to my book—Bewick’s History of British Birds: theletterpress thereof I cared little for, generally speaking; and yetthere were certain introductory pages that, child as I was, I could notpass quite as a blank. They were those which treat of the haunts ofsea-fowl; of “the solitary rocks and promontories” by them onlyinhabited; of the coast of Norway, studded with isles from its southernextremity, the Lindeness, or Naze, to the North Cape—“Where the Northern Ocean, in vast whirls,Boils round the naked, melancholy islesOf farthest Thule; and the Atlantic surgePours in among the stormy Hebrides.”Nor could I pass unnoticed the suggestion of the bleak shores ofLapland, Siberia, Spitzbergen, Nova Zembla, Iceland, Greenland, with“the vast sweep of the Arctic Zone, and those forlorn regions of drearyspace,—that reservoir of frost and snow, where firm fields of ice, theaccumulation of centuries of winters, glazed in Alpine heights aboveheights, surround the pole, and concentre the multiplied rigours ofextreme cold.” Of these death-white realms I formed an idea of my own:shadowy, like all the half-comprehended notions that float dim throughchildren’s brains, but strangely impressive. The words in theseintroductory pages connected themselves with the succeeding vignettes,and gave significance to the rock standing up alone in a sea of billowand spray; to the broken boat stranded on a desolate coast; to the coldand ghastly moon glancing through bars of cloud at a wreck justsinking.I cannot tell what sentiment haunted the quite solitary churchyard,with its inscribed headstone; its gate, its two trees, its low horizon,girdled by a broken wall, and its newly-risen crescent, attesting thehour of eventide.The two ships becalmed on a torpid sea, I believed to be marinephantoms.The fiend pinning down the thief’s pack behind him, I passed overquickly: it was an object of terror.So was the black horned thing seated aloof on a rock, surveying adistant crowd surrounding a gallows.Each picture told a story; mysterious often to my undevelopedunderstanding and imperfect feelings, yet ever profoundly interesting:as interesting as the tales Bessie sometimes narrated on winterevenings, when she chanced to be in good humour; and when, havingbrought her ironing-table to the nursery hearth, she allowed us to sitabout it, and while she got up Mrs. Reed’s lace frills, and crimped hernightcap borders, fed our eager attention with passages of love andadventure taken from old fairy tales and other ballads; or (as at alater period I discovered) from the pages of Pamela, and Henry, Earl ofMoreland.With Bewick on my knee, I was then happy: happy at least in my way. Ifeared nothing but interruption, and that came too soon. Thebreakfast-room door opened.“Boh! Madam Mope!” cried the voice of John Reed; then he paused: hefound the room apparently empty.“Where the dickens is she!” he continued. “Lizzy! Georgy! (calling tohis sisters) Joan is not here: tell mama she is run out into therain—bad animal!”“It is well I drew the curtain,” thought I; and I wished fervently hemight not discover my hiding-place: nor would John Reed have found itout himself; he was not quick either of vision or conception; but Elizajust put her head in at the door, and said at once—“She is in the window-seat, to be sure, Jack.”And I came out immediately, for I trembled at the idea of being draggedforth by the said Jack.“What do you want?” I asked, with awkward diffidence.“Say, ‘What do you want, Master Reed?’” was the answer. “I want you tocome here;” and seating himself in an arm-chair, he intimated by agesture that I was to approach and stand before him.John Reed was a schoolboy of fourteen years old; four years older thanI, for I was but ten: large and stout for his age, with a dingy andunwholesome skin; thick lineaments in a spacious visage, heavy limbsand large extremities. He gorged himself habitually at table, whichmade him bilious, and gave him a dim and bleared eye and flabby cheeks.He ought now to have been at school; but his mama had taken him homefor a month or two, “on account of his delicate health.” Mr. Miles, themaster, affirmed that he would do very well if he had fewer cakes andsweetmeats sent him from home; but the mother’s heart turned from anopinion so harsh, and inclined rather to the more refined idea thatJohn’s sallowness was owing to over-application and, perhaps, to piningafter home.John had not much affection for his mother and sisters, and anantipathy to me. He bullied and punished me; not two or three times inthe week, nor once or twice in the day, but continually: every nerve Ihad feared him, and every morsel of flesh in my bones shrank when hecame near. There were moments when I was bewildered by the terror heinspired, because I had no appeal whatever against either his menacesor his inflictions; the servants did not like to offend their youngmaster by taking my part against him, and Mrs. Reed was blind and deafon the subject: she never saw him strike or heard him abuse me, thoughhe did both now and then in her very presence, more frequently,however, behind her back.Habitually obedient to John, I came up to his chair: he spent somethree minutes in thrusting out his tongue at me as far as he couldwithout damaging the roots: I knew he would soon strike, and whiledreading the blow, I mused on the disgusting and ugly appearance of himwho would presently deal it. I wonder if he read that notion in myface; for, all at once, without speaking, he struck suddenly andstrongly. I tottered, and on regaining my equilibrium retired back astep or two from his chair.“That is for your impudence in answering mama awhile since,” said he,“and for your sneaking way of getting behind curtains, and for the lookyou had in your eyes two minutes since, you rat!”Accustomed to John Reed’s abuse, I never had an idea of replying to it;my care was how to endure the blow which would certainly follow theinsult.“What were you doing behind the curtain?” he asked.“I was reading.”“Show the book.”I returned to the window and fetched it thence.“You have no business to take our books; you are a dependent, mamasays; you have no money; your father left you none; you ought to beg,and not to live here with gentlemen’s children like us, and eat thesame meals we do, and wear clothes at our mama’s expense. Now, I’llteach you to rummage my bookshelves: for they _are_ mine; all the housebelongs to me, or will do in a few years. Go and stand by the door, outof the way of the mirror and the windows.”I did so, not at first aware what was his intention; but when I saw himlift and poise the book and stand in act to hurl it, I instinctivelystarted aside with a cry of alarm: not soon enough, however; the volumewas flung, it hit me, and I fell, striking my head against the door andcutting it. The cut bled, the pain was sharp: my terror had passed itsclimax; other feelings succeeded.“Wicked and cruel boy!” I said. “You are like a murderer—you are like aslave-driver—you are like the Roman emperors!”I had read Goldsmith’s History of Rome, and had formed my opinion ofNero, Caligula, &c. Also I had drawn parallels in silence, which Inever thought thus to have declared aloud.“What! what!” he cried. “Did she say that to me? Did you hear her,Eliza and Georgiana? Won’t I tell mama? but first—”He ran headlong at me: I felt him grasp my hair and my shoulder: he hadclosed with a desperate thing. I really saw in him a tyrant, amurderer. I felt a drop or two of blood from my head trickle down myneck, and was sensible of somewhat pungent suffering: these sensationsfor the time predominated over fear, and I received him in franticsort. I don’t very well know what I did with my hands, but he called me“Rat! Rat!” and bellowed out aloud. Aid was near him: Eliza andGeorgiana had run for Mrs. Reed, who was gone upstairs: she now cameupon the scene, followed by Bessie and her maid Abbot. We were parted:I heard the words—“Dear! dear! What a fury to fly at Master John!”“Did ever anybody see such a picture of passion!”Then Mrs. Reed subjoined—“Take her away to the red-room, and lock her in there.” Four hands wereimmediately laid upon me, and I was borne upstairs.CHAPTER III resisted all the way: a new thing for me, and a circumstance whichgreatly strengthened the bad opinion Bessie and Miss Abbot weredisposed to entertain of me. The fact is, I was a trifle beside myself;or rather _out_ of myself, as the French would say: I was consciousthat a moment’s mutiny had already rendered me liable to strangepenalties, and, like any other rebel slave, I felt resolved, in mydesperation, to go all lengths.“Hold her arms, Miss Abbot: she’s like a mad cat.”“For shame! for shame!” cried the lady’s-maid. “What shocking conduct,Miss Eyre, to strike a young gentleman, your benefactress’s son! Youryoung master.”“Master! How is he my master? Am I a servant?”“No; you are less than a servant, for you do nothing for your keep.There, sit down, and think over your wickedness.”They had got me by this time into the apartment indicated by Mrs. Reed,and had thrust me upon a stool: my impulse was to rise from it like aspring; their two pair of hands arrested me instantly.“If you don’t sit still, you must be tied down,” said Bessie. “MissAbbot, lend me your garters; she would break mine directly.”Miss Abbot turned to divest a stout leg of the necessary ligature. Thispreparation for bonds, and the additional ignominy it inferred, took alittle of the excitement out of me.“Don’t take them off,” I cried; “I will not stir.”In guarantee whereof, I attached myself to my seat by my hands.“Mind you don’t,” said Bessie; and when she had ascertained that I wasreally subsiding, she loosened her hold of me; then she and Miss Abbotstood with folded arms, looking darkly and doubtfully on my face, asincredulous of my sanity.“She never did so before,” at last said Bessie, turning to the Abigail.“But it was always in her,” was the reply. “I’ve told Missis often myopinion about the child, and Missis agreed with me. She’s an underhandlittle thing: I never saw a girl of her age with so much cover.”Bessie answered not; but ere long, addressing me, she said—“You ought to be aware, Miss, that you are under obligations to Mrs.Reed: she keeps you: if she were to turn you off, you would have to goto the poorhouse.”I had nothing to say to these words: they were not new to me: my veryfirst recollections of existence included hints of the same kind. Thisreproach of my dependence had become a vague sing-song in my ear: verypainful and crushing, but only half intelligible. Miss Abbot joined in—“And you ought not to think yourself on an equality with the MissesReed and Master Reed, because Missis kindly allows you to be brought upwith them. They will have a great deal of money, and you will havenone: it is your place to be humble, and to try to make yourselfagreeable to them.”“What we tell you is for your good,” added Bessie, in no harsh voice,“you should try to be useful and pleasant, then, perhaps, you wouldhave a home here; but if you become passionate and rude, Missis willsend you away, I am sure.”“Besides,” said Miss Abbot, “God will punish her: He might strike herdead in the midst of her tantrums, and then where would she go? Come,Bessie, we will leave her: I wouldn’t have her heart for anything. Sayyour prayers, Miss Eyre, when you are by yourself; for if you don’trepent, something bad might be permitted to come down the chimney andfetch you away.”They went, shutting the door, and locking it behind them.The red-room was a square chamber, very seldom slept in, I might saynever, indeed, unless when a chance influx of visitors at GatesheadHall rendered it necessary to turn to account all the accommodation itcontained: yet it was one of the largest and stateliest chambers in themansion. A bed supported on massive pillars of mahogany, hung withcurtains of deep red damask, stood out like a tabernacle in the centre;the two large windows, with their blinds always drawn down, were halfshrouded in festoons and falls of similar drapery; the carpet was red;the table at the foot of the bed was covered with a crimson cloth; thewalls were a soft fawn colour with a blush of pink in it; the wardrobe,the toilet-table, the chairs were of darkly polished old mahogany. Outof these deep surrounding shades rose high, and glared white, thepiled-up mattresses and pillows of the bed, spread with a snowyMarseilles counterpane. Scarcely less prominent was an ample cushionedeasy-chair near the head of the bed, also white, with a footstoolbefore it; and looking, as I thought, like a pale throne.This room was chill, because it seldom had a fire; it was silent,because remote from the nursery and kitchen; solemn, because it wasknown to be so seldom entered. The house-maid alone came here onSaturdays, to wipe from the mirrors and the furniture a week’s quietdust: and Mrs. Reed herself, at far intervals, visited it to review thecontents of a certain secret drawer in the wardrobe, where were storeddivers parchments, her jewel-casket, and a miniature of her deceasedhusband; and in those last words lies the secret of the red-room—thespell which kept it so lonely in spite of its grandeur.Mr. Reed had been dead nine years: it was in this chamber he breathedhis last; here he lay in state; hence his coffin was borne by theundertaker’s men; and, since that day, a sense of dreary consecrationhad guarded it from frequent intrusion.My seat, to which Bessie and the bitter Miss Abbot had left me riveted,was a low ottoman near the marble chimney-piece; the bed rose beforeme; to my right hand there was the high, dark wardrobe, with subdued,broken reflections varying the gloss of its panels; to my left were themuffled windows; a great looking-glass between them repeated the vacantmajesty of the bed and room. I was not quite sure whether they hadlocked the door; and when I dared move, I got up and went to see. Alas!yes: no jail was ever more secure. Returning, I had to cross before thelooking-glass; my fascinated glance involuntarily explored the depth itrevealed. All looked colder and darker in that visionary hollow than inreality: and the strange little figure there gazing at me, with a whiteface and arms specking the gloom, and glittering eyes of fear movingwhere all else was still, had the effect of a real spirit: I thought itlike one of the tiny phantoms, half fairy, half imp, Bessie’s eveningstories represented as coming out of lone, ferny dells in moors, andappearing before the eyes of belated travellers. I returned to mystool.Superstition was with me at that moment; but it was not yet her hourfor complete victory: my blood was still warm; the mood of the revoltedslave was still bracing me with its bitter vigour; I had to stem arapid rush of retrospective thought before I quailed to the dismalpresent.All John Reed’s violent tyrannies, all his sisters’ proud indifference,all his mother’s aversion, all the servants’ partiality, turned up inmy disturbed mind like a dark deposit in a turbid well. Why was Ialways suffering, always browbeaten, always accused, for evercondemned? Why could I never please? Why was it useless to try to winany one’s favour? Eliza, who was headstrong and selfish, was respected.Georgiana, who had a spoiled temper, a very acrid spite, a captious andinsolent carriage, was universally indulged. Her beauty, her pinkcheeks and golden curls, seemed to give delight to all who looked ather, and to purchase indemnity for every fault. John no one thwarted,much less punished; though he twisted the necks of the pigeons, killedthe little pea-chicks, set the dogs at the sheep, stripped the hothousevines of their fruit, and broke the buds off the choicest plants in theconservatory: he called his mother “old girl,” too; sometimes reviledher for her dark skin, similar to his own; bluntly disregarded herwishes; not unfrequently tore and spoiled her silk attire; and he wasstill “her own darling.” I dared commit no fault: I strove to fulfilevery duty; and I was termed naughty and tiresome, sullen and sneaking,from morning to noon, and from noon to night.My head still ached and bled with the blow and fall I had received: noone had reproved John for wantonly striking me; and because I hadturned against him to avert farther irrational violence, I was loadedwith general opprobrium.“Unjust!—unjust!” said my reason, forced by the agonising stimulus intoprecocious though transitory power: and Resolve, equally wrought up,instigated some strange expedient to achieve escape from insupportableoppression—as running away, or, if that could not be effected, nevereating or drinking more, and letting myself die.What a consternation of soul was mine that dreary afternoon! How all mybrain was in tumult, and all my heart in insurrection! Yet in whatdarkness, what dense ignorance, was the mental battle fought! I couldnot answer the ceaseless inward question—_why_ I thus suffered; now, atthe distance of—I will not say how many years, I see it clearly.I was a discord in Gateshead Hall: I was like nobody there; I hadnothing in harmony with Mrs. Reed or her children, or her chosenvassalage. If they did not love me, in fact, as little did I love them.They were not bound to regard with affection a thing that could notsympathise with one amongst them; a heterogeneous thing, opposed tothem in temperament, in capacity, in propensities; a useless thing,incapable of serving their interest, or adding to their pleasure; anoxious thing, cherishing the germs of indignation at their treatment,of contempt of their judgment. I know that had I been a sanguine,brilliant, careless, exacting, handsome, romping child—though equallydependent and friendless—Mrs. Reed would have endured my presence morecomplacently; her children would have entertained for me more of thecordiality of fellow-feeling; the servants would have been less proneto make me the scapegoat of the nursery.Daylight began to forsake the red-room; it was past four o’clock, andthe beclouded afternoon was tending to drear twilight. I heard the rainstill beating continuously on the staircase window, and the windhowling in the grove behind the hall; I grew by degrees cold as astone, and then my courage sank. My habitual mood of humiliation,self-doubt, forlorn depression, fell damp on the embers of my decayingire. All said I was wicked, and perhaps I might be so; what thought hadI been but just conceiving of starving myself to death? That certainlywas a crime: and was I fit to die? Or was the vault under the chancelof Gateshead Church an inviting bourne? In such vault I had been tolddid Mr. Reed lie buried; and led by this thought to recall his idea, Idwelt on it with gathering dread. I could not remember him; but I knewthat he was my own uncle—my mother’s brother—that he had taken me whena parentless infant to his house; and that in his last moments he hadrequired a promise of Mrs. Reed that she would rear and maintain me asone of her own children. Mrs. Reed probably considered she had keptthis promise; and so she had, I dare say, as well as her nature wouldpermit her; but how could she really like an interloper not of herrace, and unconnected with her, after her husband’s death, by any tie?It must have been most irksome to find herself bound by a hard-wrungpledge to stand in the stead of a parent to a strange child she couldnot love, and to see an uncongenial alien permanently intruded on herown family group.A singular notion dawned upon me. I doubted not—never doubted—that ifMr. Reed had been alive he would have treated me kindly; and now, as Isat looking at the white bed and overshadowed walls—occasionally alsoturning a fascinated eye towards the dimly gleaming mirror—I began torecall what I had heard of dead men, troubled in their graves by theviolation of their last wishes, revisiting the earth to punish theperjured and avenge the oppressed; and I thought Mr. Reed’s spirit,harassed by the wrongs of his sister’s child, might quit itsabode—whether in the church vault or in the unknown world of thedeparted—and rise before me in this chamber. I wiped my tears andhushed my sobs, fearful lest any sign of violent grief might waken apreternatural voice to comfort me, or elicit from the gloom some haloedface, bending over me with strange pity. This idea, consolatory intheory, I felt would be terrible if realised: with all my might Iendeavoured to stifle it—I endeavoured to be firm. Shaking my hair frommy eyes, I lifted my head and tried to look boldly round the dark room;at this moment a light gleamed on the wall. Was it, I asked myself, aray from the moon penetrating some aperture in the blind? No; moonlightwas still, and this stirred; while I gazed, it glided up to the ceilingand quivered over my head. I can now conjecture readily that thisstreak of light was, in all likelihood, a gleam from a lantern carriedby some one across the lawn: but then, prepared as my mind was forhorror, shaken as my nerves were by agitation, I thought the swiftdarting beam was a herald of some coming vision from another world. Myheart beat thick, my head grew hot; a sound filled my ears, which Ideemed the rushing of wings; something seemed near me; I was oppressed,suffocated: endurance broke down; I rushed to the door and shook thelock in desperate effort. Steps came running along the outer passage;the key turned, Bessie and Abbot entered.“Miss Eyre, are you ill?” said Bessie.“What a dreadful noise! it went quite through me!” exclaimed Abbot.“Take me out! Let me go into the nursery!” was my cry.“What for? Are you hurt? Have you seen something?” again demandedBessie.“Oh! I saw a light, and I thought a ghost would come.” I had now gothold of Bessie’s hand, and she did not snatch it from me.“She has screamed out on purpose,” declared Abbot, in some disgust.“And what a scream! If she had been in great pain one would haveexcused it, but she only wanted to bring us all here: I know hernaughty tricks.”“What is all this?” demanded another voice peremptorily; and Mrs. Reedcame along the corridor, her cap flying wide, her gown rustlingstormily. “Abbot and Bessie, I believe I gave orders that Jane Eyreshould be left in the red-room till I came to her myself.”“Miss Jane screamed so loud, ma’am,” pleaded Bessie.“Let her go,” was the only answer. “Loose Bessie’s hand, child: youcannot succeed in getting out by these means, be assured. I abhorartifice, particularly in children; it is my duty to show you thattricks will not answer: you will now stay here an hour longer, and itis only on condition of perfect submission and stillness that I shallliberate you then.”“O aunt! have pity! Forgive me! I cannot endure it—let me be punishedsome other way! I shall be killed if—”“Silence! This violence is all most repulsive:” and so, no doubt, shefelt it. I was a precocious actress in her eyes; she sincerely lookedon me as a compound of virulent passions, mean spirit, and dangerousduplicity.Bessie and Abbot having retreated, Mrs. Reed, impatient of my nowfrantic anguish and wild sobs, abruptly thrust me back and locked mein, without farther parley. I heard her sweeping away; and soon aftershe was gone, I suppose I had a species of fit: unconsciousness closedthe scene.CHAPTER IIIThe next thing I remember is, waking up with a feeling as if I had hada frightful nightmare, and seeing before me a terrible red glare,crossed with thick black bars. I heard voices, too, speaking with ahollow sound, and as if muffled by a rush of wind or water: agitation,uncertainty, and an all-predominating sense of terror confused myfaculties. Ere long, I became aware that some one was handling me;lifting me up and supporting me in a sitting posture, and that moretenderly than I had ever been raised or upheld before. I rested my headagainst a pillow or an arm, and felt easy.In five minutes more the cloud of bewilderment dissolved: I knew quitewell that I was in my own bed, and that the red glare was the nurseryfire. It was night: a candle burnt on the table; Bessie stood at thebed-foot with a basin in her hand, and a gentleman sat in a chair nearmy pillow, leaning over me.I felt an inexpressible relief, a soothing conviction of protection andsecurity, when I knew that there was a stranger in the room, anindividual not belonging to Gateshead, and not related to Mrs. Reed.Turning from Bessie (though her presence was far less obnoxious to methan that of Abbot, for instance, would have been), I scrutinised theface of the gentleman: I knew him; it was Mr. Lloyd, an apothecary,sometimes called in by Mrs. Reed when the servants were ailing: forherself and the children she employed a physician.“Well, who am I?” he asked.I pronounced his name, offering him at the same time my hand: he tookit, smiling and saying, “We shall do very well by-and-by.” Then he laidme down, and addressing Bessie, charged her to be very careful that Iwas not disturbed during the night. Having given some furtherdirections, and intimated that he should call again the next day, hedeparted; to my grief: I felt so sheltered and befriended while he satin the chair near my pillow; and as he closed the door after him, allthe room darkened and my heart again sank: inexpressible sadnessweighed it down.“Do you feel as if you should sleep, Miss?” asked Bessie, rathersoftly.Scarcely dared I answer her; for I feared the next sentence might berough. “I will try.”“Would you like to drink, or could you eat anything?”“No, thank you, Bessie.”“Then I think I shall go to bed, for it is past twelve o’clock; but youmay call me if you want anything in the night.”Wonderful civility this! It emboldened me to ask a question.“Bessie, what is the matter with me? Am I ill?”“You fell sick, I suppose, in the red-room with crying; you’ll bebetter soon, no doubt.”Bessie went into the housemaid’s apartment, which was near. I heard hersay—“Sarah, come and sleep with me in the nursery; I daren’t for my life bealone with that poor child to-night: she might die; it’s such a strangething she should have that fit: I wonder if she saw anything. Missiswas rather too hard.”Sarah came back with her; they both went to bed; they were whisperingtogether for half-an-hour before they fell asleep. I caught scraps oftheir conversation, from which I was able only too distinctly to inferthe main subject discussed.“Something passed her, all dressed in white, and vanished”—“A greatblack dog behind him”—“Three loud raps on the chamber door”—“A light inthe churchyard just over his grave,” &c., &c.At last both slept: the fire and the candle went out. For me, thewatches of that long night passed in ghastly wakefulness; ear, eye, andmind were alike strained by dread: such dread as children only canfeel.No severe or prolonged bodily illness followed this incident of thered-room; it only gave my nerves a shock of which I feel thereverberation to this day. Yes, Mrs. Reed, to you I owe some fearfulpangs of mental suffering, but I ought to forgive you, for you knew notwhat you did: while rending my heart-strings, you thought you were onlyuprooting my bad propensities.Next day, by noon, I was up and dressed, and sat wrapped in a shawl bythe nursery hearth. I felt physically weak and broken down: but myworse ailment was an unutterable wretchedness of mind: a wretchednesswhich kept drawing from me silent tears; no sooner had I wiped one saltdrop from my cheek than another followed. Yet, I thought, I ought tohave been happy, for none of the Reeds were there, they were all goneout in the carriage with their mama. Abbot, too, was sewing in anotherroom, and Bessie, as she moved hither and thither, putting away toysand arranging drawers, addressed to me every now and then a word ofunwonted kindness. This state of things should have been to me aparadise of peace, accustomed as I was to a life of ceaseless reprimandand thankless fagging; but, in fact, my racked nerves were now in sucha state that no calm could soothe, and no pleasure excite themagreeably.Bessie had been down into the kitchen, and she brought up with her atart on a certain brightly painted china plate, whose bird of paradise,nestling in a wreath of convolvuli and rosebuds, had been wont to stirin me a most enthusiastic sense of admiration; and which plate I hadoften petitioned to be allowed to take in my hand in order to examineit more closely, but had always hitherto been deemed unworthy of such aprivilege. This precious vessel was now placed on my knee, and I wascordially invited to eat the circlet of delicate pastry upon it. Vainfavour! coming, like most other favours long deferred and often wishedfor, too late! I could not eat the tart; and the plumage of the bird,the tints of the flowers, seemed strangely faded: I put both plate andtart away. Bessie asked if I would have a book: the word _book_ actedas a transient stimulus, and I begged her to fetch Gulliver’s Travelsfrom the library. This book I had again and again perused with delight.I considered it a narrative of facts, and discovered in it a vein ofinterest deeper than what I found in fairy tales: for as to the elves,having sought them in vain among foxglove leaves and bells, undermushrooms and beneath the ground-ivy mantling old wall-nooks, I had atlength made up my mind to the sad truth, that they were all gone out ofEngland to some savage country where the woods were wilder and thicker,and the population more scant; whereas, Lilliput and Brobdignag being,in my creed, solid parts of the earth’s surface, I doubted not that Imight one day, by taking a long voyage, see with my own eyes the littlefields, houses, and trees, the diminutive people, the tiny cows, sheep,and birds of the one realm; and the corn-fields forest-high, the mightymastiffs, the monster cats, the tower-like men and women, of the other.Yet, when this cherished volume was now placed in my hand—when I turnedover its leaves, and sought in its marvellous pictures the charm I had,till now, never failed to find—all was eerie and dreary; the giantswere gaunt goblins, the pigmies malevolent and fearful imps, Gulliver amost desolate wanderer in most dread and dangerous regions. I closedthe book, which I dared no longer peruse, and put it on the table,beside the untasted tart.Bessie had now finished dusting and tidying the room, and having washedher hands, she opened a certain little drawer, full of splendid shredsof silk and satin, and began making a new bonnet for Georgiana’s doll.Meantime she sang: her song was—“In the days when we went gipsying,    A long time ago.”I had often heard the song before, and always with lively delight; forBessie had a sweet voice,—at least, I thought so. But now, though hervoice was still sweet, I found in its melody an indescribable sadness.Sometimes, preoccupied with her work, she sang the refrain very low,very lingeringly; “A long time ago” came out like the saddest cadenceof a funeral hymn. She passed into another ballad, this time a reallydoleful one.“My feet they are sore, and my limbs they are weary;    Long is the way, and the mountains are wild;Soon will the twilight close moonless and dreary    Over the path of the poor orphan child.Why did they send me so far and so lonely,    Up where the moors spread and grey rocks are piled?Men are hard-hearted, and kind angels only    Watch o’er the steps of a poor orphan child.Yet distant and soft the night breeze is blowing,    Clouds there are none, and clear stars beam mild,God, in His mercy, protection is showing,    Comfort and hope to the poor orphan child.Ev’n should I fall o’er the broken bridge passing,    Or stray in the marshes, by false lights beguiled,Still will my Father, with promise and blessing,    Take to His bosom the poor orphan child.There is a thought that for strength should avail me,    Though both of shelter and kindred despoiled;Heaven is a home, and a rest will not fail me;    God is a friend to the poor orphan child.”“Come, Miss Jane, don’t cry,” said Bessie as she finished. She might aswell have said to the fire, “don’t burn!” but how could she divine themorbid suffering to which I was a prey? In the course of the morningMr. Lloyd came again.“What, already up!” said he, as he entered the nursery. “Well, nurse,how is she?”Bessie answered that I was doing very well.“Then she ought to look more cheerful. Come here, Miss Jane: your nameis Jane, is it not?”“Yes, sir, Jane Eyre.”“Well, you have been crying, Miss Jane Eyre; can you tell me whatabout? Have you any pain?”“No, sir.”“Oh! I daresay she is crying because she could not go out with Missisin the carriage,” interposed Bessie.“Surely not! why, she is too old for such pettishness.”I thought so too; and my self-esteem being wounded by the false charge,I answered promptly, “I never cried for such a thing in my life: I hategoing out in the carriage. I cry because I am miserable.”“Oh fie, Miss!” said Bessie.The good apothecary appeared a little puzzled. I was standing beforehim; he fixed his eyes on me very steadily: his eyes were small andgrey; not very bright, but I dare say I should think them shrewd now:he had a hard-featured yet good-natured looking face. Having consideredme at leisure, he said—“What made you ill yesterday?”“She had a fall,” said Bessie, again putting in her word.“Fall! why, that is like a baby again! Can’t she manage to walk at herage? She must be eight or nine years old.”“I was knocked down,” was the blunt explanation, jerked out of me byanother pang of mortified pride; “but that did not make me ill,” Iadded; while Mr. Lloyd helped himself to a pinch of snuff.As he was returning the box to his waistcoat pocket, a loud bell rangfor the servants’ dinner; he knew what it was. “That’s for you, nurse,”said he; “you can go down; I’ll give Miss Jane a lecture till you comeback.”Bessie would rather have stayed, but she was obliged to go, becausepunctuality at meals was rigidly enforced at Gateshead Hall.“The fall did not make you ill; what did, then?” pursued Mr. Lloyd whenBessie was gone.“I was shut up in a room where there is a ghost till after dark.”I saw Mr. Lloyd smile and frown at the same time.“Ghost! What, you are a baby after all! You are afraid of ghosts?”“Of Mr. Reed’s ghost I am: he died in that room, and was laid outthere. Neither Bessie nor any one else will go into it at night, ifthey can help it; and it was cruel to shut me up alone without acandle,—so cruel that I think I shall never forget it.”“Nonsense! And is it that makes you so miserable? Are you afraid now indaylight?”“No: but night will come again before long: and besides,—I amunhappy,—very unhappy, for other things.”“What other things? Can you tell me some of them?”How much I wished to reply fully to this question! How difficult it wasto frame any answer! Children can feel, but they cannot analyse theirfeelings; and if the analysis is partially effected in thought, theyknow not how to express the result of the process in words. Fearful,however, of losing this first and only opportunity of relieving mygrief by imparting it, I, after a disturbed pause, contrived to frame ameagre, though, as far as it went, true response.“For one thing, I have no father or mother, brothers or sisters.”“You have a kind aunt and cousins.”Again I paused; then bunglingly enounced—“But John Reed knocked me down, and my aunt shut me up in thered-room.”Mr. Lloyd a second time produced his snuff-box.“Don’t you think Gateshead Hall a very beautiful house?” asked he. “Areyou not very thankful to have such a fine place to live at?”“It is not my house, sir; and Abbot says I have less right to be herethan a servant.”“Pooh! you can’t be silly enough to wish to leave such a splendidplace?”“If I had anywhere else to go, I should be glad to leave it; but I cannever get away from Gateshead till I am a woman.”“Perhaps you may—who knows? Have you any relations besides Mrs. Reed?”“I think not, sir.”“None belonging to your father?”“I don’t know: I asked Aunt Reed once, and she said possibly I mighthave some poor, low relations called Eyre, but she knew nothing aboutthem.”“If you had such, would you like to go to them?”I reflected. Poverty looks grim to grown people; still more so tochildren: they have not much idea of industrious, working, respectablepoverty; they think of the word only as connected with ragged clothes,scanty food, fireless grates, rude manners, and debasing vices: povertyfor me was synonymous with degradation.“No; I should not like to belong to poor people,” was my reply.“Not even if they were kind to you?”I shook my head: I could not see how poor people had the means of beingkind; and then to learn to speak like them, to adopt their manners, tobe uneducated, to grow up like one of the poor women I saw sometimesnursing their children or washing their clothes at the cottage doors ofthe village of Gateshead: no, I was not heroic enough to purchaseliberty at the price of caste.“But are your relatives so very poor? Are they working people?”“I cannot tell; Aunt Reed says if I have any, they must be a beggarlyset: I should not like to go a begging.”“Would you like to go to school?”Again I reflected: I scarcely knew what school was: Bessie sometimesspoke of it as a place where young ladies sat in the stocks, worebackboards, and were expected to be exceedingly genteel and precise:John Reed hated his school, and abused his master; but John Reed’stastes were no rule for mine, and if Bessie’s accounts ofschool-discipline (gathered from the young ladies of a family where shehad lived before coming to Gateshead) were somewhat appalling, herdetails of certain accomplishments attained by these same young ladieswere, I thought, equally attractive. She boasted of beautiful paintingsof landscapes and flowers by them executed; of songs they could singand pieces they could play, of purses they could net, of French booksthey could translate; till my spirit was moved to emulation as Ilistened. Besides, school would be a complete change: it implied a longjourney, an entire separation from Gateshead, an entrance into a newlife.“I should indeed like to go to school,” was the audible conclusion ofmy musings.“Well, well! who knows what may happen?” said Mr. Lloyd, as he got up.“The child ought to have change of air and scene,” he added, speakingto himself; “nerves not in a good state.”Bessie now returned; at the same moment the carriage was heard rollingup the gravel-walk.“Is that your mistress, nurse?” asked Mr. Lloyd. “I should like tospeak to her before I go.”Bessie invited him to walk into the breakfast-room, and led the wayout. In the interview which followed between him and Mrs. Reed, Ipresume, from after-occurrences, that the apothecary ventured torecommend my being sent to school; and the recommendation was no doubtreadily enough adopted; for as Abbot said, in discussing the subjectwith Bessie when both sat sewing in the nursery one night, after I wasin bed, and, as they thought, asleep, “Missis was, she dared say, gladenough to get rid of such a tiresome, ill-conditioned child, who alwayslooked as if she were watching everybody, and scheming plotsunderhand.” Abbot, I think, gave me credit for being a sort ofinfantine Guy Fawkes.On that same occasion I learned, for the first time, from Miss Abbot’scommunications to Bessie, that my father had been a poor clergyman;that my mother had married him against the wishes of her friends, whoconsidered the match beneath her; that my grandfather Reed was soirritated at her disobedience, he cut her off without a shilling; thatafter my mother and father had been married a year, the latter caughtthe typhus fever while visiting among the poor of a large manufacturingtown where his curacy was situated, and where that disease was thenprevalent: that my mother took the infection from him, and both diedwithin a month of each other.Bessie, when she heard this narrative, sighed and said, “Poor Miss Janeis to be pitied, too, Abbot.”“Yes,” responded Abbot; “if she were a nice, pretty child, one mightcompassionate her forlornness; but one really cannot care for such alittle toad as that.”“Not a great deal, to be sure,” agreed Bessie: “at any rate, a beautylike Miss Georgiana would be more moving in the same condition.”“Yes, I doat on Miss Georgiana!” cried the fervent Abbot. “Littledarling!—with her long curls and her blue eyes, and such a sweet colouras she has; just as if she were painted!—Bessie, I could fancy a Welshrabbit for supper.”“So could I—with a roast onion. Come, we’ll go down.” They went.CHAPTER IVFrom my discourse with Mr. Lloyd, and from the above reportedconference between Bessie and Abbot, I gathered enough of hope tosuffice as a motive for wishing to get well: a change seemed near,—Idesired and waited it in silence. It tarried, however: days and weekspassed: I had regained my normal state of health, but no new allusionwas made to the subject over which I brooded. Mrs. Reed surveyed me attimes with a severe eye, but seldom addressed me: since my illness, shehad drawn a more marked line of separation than ever between me and herown children; appointing me a small closet to sleep in by myself,condemning me to take my meals alone, and pass all my time in thenursery, while my cousins were constantly in the drawing-room. Not ahint, however, did she drop about sending me to school: still I felt aninstinctive certainty that she would not long endure me under the sameroof with her; for her glance, now more than ever, when turned on me,expressed an insuperable and rooted aversion.Eliza and Georgiana, evidently acting according to orders, spoke to meas little as possible: John thrust his tongue in his cheek whenever hesaw me, and once attempted chastisement; but as I instantly turnedagainst him, roused by the same sentiment of deep ire and desperaterevolt which had stirred my corruption before, he thought it better todesist, and ran from me uttering execrations, and vowing I had bursthis nose. I had indeed levelled at that prominent feature as hard ablow as my knuckles could inflict; and when I saw that either that ormy look daunted him, I had the greatest inclination to follow up myadvantage to purpose; but he was already with his mama. I heard him ina blubbering tone commence the tale of how “that nasty Jane Eyre” hadflown at him like a mad cat: he was stopped rather harshly—“Don’t talk to me about her, John: I told you not to go near her; sheis not worthy of notice; I do not choose that either you or yoursisters should associate with her.”Here, leaning over the banister, I cried out suddenly, and without atall deliberating on my words—“They are not fit to associate with me.”Mrs. Reed was rather a stout woman; but, on hearing this strange andaudacious declaration, she ran nimbly up the stair, swept me like awhirlwind into the nursery, and crushing me down on the edge of mycrib, dared me in an emphatic voice to rise from that place, or utterone syllable during the remainder of the day.“What would Uncle Reed say to you, if he were alive?” was my scarcelyvoluntary demand. I say scarcely voluntary, for it seemed as if mytongue pronounced words without my will consenting to their utterance:something spoke out of me over which I had no control.“What?” said Mrs. Reed under her breath: her usually cold composed greyeye became troubled with a look like fear; she took her hand from myarm, and gazed at me as if she really did not know whether I were childor fiend. I was now in for it.“My Uncle Reed is in heaven, and can see all you do and think; and socan papa and mama: they know how you shut me up all day long, and howyou wish me dead.”Mrs. Reed soon rallied her spirits: she shook me most soundly, sheboxed both my ears, and then left me without a word. Bessie suppliedthe hiatus by a homily of an hour’s length, in which she proved beyonda doubt that I was the most wicked and abandoned child ever rearedunder a roof. I half believed her; for I felt indeed only bad feelingssurging in my breast.November, December, and half of January passed away. Christmas and theNew Year had been celebrated at Gateshead with the usual festive cheer;presents had been interchanged, dinners and evening parties given. Fromevery enjoyment I was, of course, excluded: my share of the gaietyconsisted in witnessing the daily apparelling of Eliza and Georgiana,and seeing them descend to the drawing-room, dressed out in thin muslinfrocks and scarlet sashes, with hair elaborately ringletted; andafterwards, in listening to the sound of the piano or the harp playedbelow, to the passing to and fro of the butler and footman, to thejingling of glass and china as refreshments were handed, to the brokenhum of conversation as the drawing-room door opened and closed. Whentired of this occupation, I would retire from the stairhead to thesolitary and silent nursery: there, though somewhat sad, I was notmiserable. To speak truth, I had not the least wish to go into company,for in company I was very rarely noticed; and if Bessie had but beenkind and companionable, I should have deemed it a treat to spend theevenings quietly with her, instead of passing them under the formidableeye of Mrs. Reed, in a room full of ladies and gentlemen. But Bessie,as soon as she had dressed her young ladies, used to take herself offto the lively regions of the kitchen and housekeeper’s room, generallybearing the candle along with her. I then sat with my doll on my kneetill the fire got low, glancing round occasionally to make sure thatnothing worse than myself haunted the shadowy room; and when the emberssank to a dull red, I undressed hastily, tugging at knots and stringsas I best might, and sought shelter from cold and darkness in my crib.To this crib I always took my doll; human beings must love something,and, in the dearth of worthier objects of affection, I contrived tofind a pleasure in loving and cherishing a faded graven image, shabbyas a miniature scarecrow. It puzzles me now to remember with whatabsurd sincerity I doated on this little toy, half fancying it aliveand capable of sensation. I could not sleep unless it was folded in mynight-gown; and when it lay there safe and warm, I was comparativelyhappy, believing it to be happy likewise.Long did the hours seem while I waited the departure of the company,and listened for the sound of Bessie’s step on the stairs: sometimesshe would come up in the interval to seek her thimble or her scissors,or perhaps to bring me something by way of supper—a bun or acheese-cake—then she would sit on the bed while I ate it, and when Ihad finished, she would tuck the clothes round me, and twice she kissedme, and said, “Good night, Miss Jane.” When thus gentle, Bessie seemedto me the best, prettiest, kindest being in the world; and I wishedmost intensely that she would always be so pleasant and amiable, andnever push me about, or scold, or task me unreasonably, as she was toooften wont to do. Bessie Lee must, I think, have been a girl of goodnatural capacity, for she was smart in all she did, and had aremarkable knack of narrative; so, at least, I judge from theimpression made on me by her nursery tales. She was pretty too, if myrecollections of her face and person are correct. I remember her as aslim young woman, with black hair, dark eyes, very nice features, andgood, clear complexion; but she had a capricious and hasty temper, andindifferent ideas of principle or justice: still, such as she was, Ipreferred her to any one else at Gateshead Hall.It was the fifteenth of January, about nine o’clock in the morning:Bessie was gone down to breakfast; my cousins had not yet been summonedto their mama; Eliza was putting on her bonnet and warm garden-coat togo and feed her poultry, an occupation of which she was fond: and notless so of selling the eggs to the housekeeper and hoarding up themoney she thus obtained. She had a turn for traffic, and a markedpropensity for saving; shown not only in the vending of eggs andchickens, but also in driving hard bargains with the gardener aboutflower-roots, seeds, and slips of plants; that functionary havingorders from Mrs. Reed to buy of his young lady all the products of herparterre she wished to sell: and Eliza would have sold the hair off herhead if she could have made a handsome profit thereby. As to her money,she first secreted it in odd corners, wrapped in a rag or an oldcurl-paper; but some of these hoards having been discovered by thehousemaid, Eliza, fearful of one day losing her valued treasure,consented to intrust it to her mother, at a usurious rate ofinterest—fifty or sixty per cent.; which interest she exacted everyquarter, keeping her accounts in a little book with anxious accuracy.Georgiana sat on a high stool, dressing her hair at the glass, andinterweaving her curls with artificial flowers and faded feathers, ofwhich she had found a store in a drawer in the attic. I was making mybed, having received strict orders from Bessie to get it arrangedbefore she returned (for Bessie now frequently employed me as a sort ofunder-nurserymaid, to tidy the room, dust the chairs, &c.). Havingspread the quilt and folded my night-dress, I went to the window-seatto put in order some picture-books and doll’s house furniture scatteredthere; an abrupt command from Georgiana to let her playthings alone(for the tiny chairs and mirrors, the fairy plates and cups, were herproperty) stopped my proceedings; and then, for lack of otheroccupation, I fell to breathing on the frost-flowers with which thewindow was fretted, and thus clearing a space in the glass throughwhich I might look out on the grounds, where all was still andpetrified under the influence of a hard frost.From this window were visible the porter’s lodge and the carriage-road,and just as I had dissolved so much of the silver-white foliage veilingthe panes as left room to look out, I saw the gates thrown open and acarriage roll through. I watched it ascending the drive withindifference; carriages often came to Gateshead, but none ever broughtvisitors in whom I was interested; it stopped in front of the house,the door-bell rang loudly, the new-comer was admitted. All this beingnothing to me, my vacant attention soon found livelier attraction inthe spectacle of a little hungry robin, which came and chirruped on thetwigs of the leafless cherry-tree nailed against the wall near thecasement. The remains of my breakfast of bread and milk stood on thetable, and having crumbled a morsel of roll, I was tugging at the sashto put out the crumbs on the window-sill, when Bessie came runningupstairs into the nursery.“Miss Jane, take off your pinafore; what are you doing there? Have youwashed your hands and face this morning?” I gave another tug before Ianswered, for I wanted the bird to be secure of its bread: the sashyielded; I scattered the crumbs, some on the stone sill, some on thecherry-tree bough, then, closing the window, I replied—“No, Bessie; I have only just finished dusting.”“Troublesome, careless child! and what are you doing now? You lookquite red, as if you had been about some mischief: what were youopening the window for?”I was spared the trouble of answering, for Bessie seemed in too great ahurry to listen to explanations; she hauled me to the washstand,inflicted a merciless, but happily brief scrub on my face and handswith soap, water, and a coarse towel; disciplined my head with abristly brush, denuded me of my pinafore, and then hurrying me to thetop of the stairs, bid me go down directly, as I was wanted in thebreakfast-room.I would have asked who wanted me: I would have demanded if Mrs. Reedwas there; but Bessie was already gone, and had closed the nursery-doorupon me. I slowly descended. For nearly three months, I had never beencalled to Mrs. Reed’s presence; restricted so long to the nursery, thebreakfast, dining, and drawing-rooms were become for me awful regions,on which it dismayed me to intrude.I now stood in the empty hall; before me was the breakfast-room door,and I stopped, intimidated and trembling. What a miserable littlepoltroon had fear, engendered of unjust punishment, made of me in thosedays! I feared to return to the nursery, and feared to go forward tothe parlour; ten minutes I stood in agitated hesitation; the vehementringing of the breakfast-room bell decided me; I _must_ enter.“Who could want me?” I asked inwardly, as with both hands I turned thestiff door-handle, which, for a second or two, resisted my efforts.“What should I see besides Aunt Reed in the apartment?—a man or awoman?” The handle turned, the door unclosed, and passing through andcurtseying low, I looked up at—a black pillar!—such, at least, appearedto me, at first sight, the straight, narrow, sable-clad shape standingerect on the rug: the grim face at the top was like a carved mask,placed above the shaft by way of capital.Mrs. Reed occupied her usual seat by the fireside; she made a signal tome to approach; I did so, and she introduced me to the stony strangerwith the words: “This is the little girl respecting whom I applied toyou.”_He_, for it was a man, turned his head slowly towards where I stood,and having examined me with the two inquisitive-looking grey eyes whichtwinkled under a pair of bushy brows, said solemnly, and in a bassvoice, “Her size is small: what is her age?”“Ten years.”“So much?” was the doubtful answer; and he prolonged his scrutiny forsome minutes. Presently he addressed me—“Your name, little girl?”“Jane Eyre, sir.”In uttering these words I looked up: he seemed to me a tall gentleman;but then I was very little; his features were large, and they and allthe lines of his frame were equally harsh and prim.“Well, Jane Eyre, and are you a good child?”Impossible to reply to this in the affirmative: my little world held acontrary opinion: I was silent. Mrs. Reed answered for me by anexpressive shake of the head, adding soon, “Perhaps the less said onthat subject the better, Mr. Brocklehurst.”“Sorry indeed to hear it! she and I must have some talk;” and bendingfrom the perpendicular, he installed his person in the arm-chairopposite Mrs. Reed’s. “Come here,” he said.I stepped across the rug; he placed me square and straight before him.What a face he had, now that it was almost on a level with mine! what agreat nose! and what a mouth! and what large prominent teeth!“No sight so sad as that of a naughty child,” he began, “especially anaughty little girl. Do you know where the wicked go after death?”“They go to hell,” was my ready and orthodox answer.“And what is hell? Can you tell me that?”“A pit full of fire.”“And should you like to fall into that pit, and to be burning there forever?”“No, sir.”“What must you do to avoid it?”I deliberated a moment; my answer, when it did come, was objectionable:“I must keep in good health, and not die.”“How can you keep in good health? Children younger than you die daily.I buried a little child of five years old only a day or two since,—agood little child, whose soul is now in heaven. It is to be feared thesame could not be said of you were you to be called hence.”Not being in a condition to remove his doubt, I only cast my eyes downon the two large feet planted on the rug, and sighed, wishing myselffar enough away.“I hope that sigh is from the heart, and that you repent of ever havingbeen the occasion of discomfort to your excellent benefactress.”“Benefactress! benefactress!” said I inwardly: “they all call Mrs. Reedmy benefactress; if so, a benefactress is a disagreeable thing.”“Do you say your prayers night and morning?” continued my interrogator.“Yes, sir.”“Do you read your Bible?”“Sometimes.”“With pleasure? Are you fond of it?”“I like Revelations, and the book of Daniel, and Genesis and Samuel,and a little bit of Exodus, and some parts of Kings and Chronicles, andJob and Jonah.”“And the Psalms? I hope you like them?”“No, sir.”“No? oh, shocking! I have a little boy, younger than you, who knows sixPsalms by heart: and when you ask him which he would rather have, agingerbread-nut to eat or a verse of a Psalm to learn, he says: ‘Oh!the verse of a Psalm! angels sing Psalms;’ says he, ‘I wish to be alittle angel here below;’ he then gets two nuts in recompense for hisinfant piety.”“Psalms are not interesting,” I remarked.“That proves you have a wicked heart; and you must pray to God tochange it: to give you a new and clean one: to take away your heart ofstone and give you a heart of flesh.”I was about to propound a question, touching the manner in which thatoperation of changing my heart was to be performed, when Mrs. Reedinterposed, telling me to sit down; she then proceeded to carry on theconversation herself.“Mr. Brocklehurst, I believe I intimated in the letter which I wrote toyou three weeks ago, that this little girl has not quite the characterand disposition I could wish: should you admit her into Lowood school,I should be glad if the superintendent and teachers were requested tokeep a strict eye on her, and, above all, to guard against her worstfault, a tendency to deceit. I mention this in your hearing, Jane, thatyou may not attempt to impose on Mr. Brocklehurst.”Well might I dread, well might I dislike Mrs. Reed; for it was hernature to wound me cruelly; never was I happy in her presence; howevercarefully I obeyed, however strenuously I strove to please her, myefforts were still repulsed and repaid by such sentences as the above.Now, uttered before a stranger, the accusation cut me to the heart; Idimly perceived that she was already obliterating hope from the newphase of existence which she destined me to enter; I felt, though Icould not have expressed the feeling, that she was sowing aversion andunkindness along my future path; I saw myself transformed under Mr.Brocklehurst’s eye into an artful, noxious child, and what could I doto remedy the injury?“Nothing, indeed,” thought I, as I struggled to repress a sob, andhastily wiped away some tears, the impotent evidences of my anguish.“Deceit is, indeed, a sad fault in a child,” said Mr. Brocklehurst; “itis akin to falsehood, and all liars will have their portion in the lakeburning with fire and brimstone; she shall, however, be watched, Mrs.Reed. I will speak to Miss Temple and the teachers.”“I should wish her to be brought up in a manner suiting her prospects,”continued my benefactress; “to be made useful, to be kept humble: asfor the vacations, she will, with your permission, spend them always atLowood.”“Your decisions are perfectly judicious, madam,” returned Mr.Brocklehurst. “Humility is a Christian grace, and one peculiarlyappropriate to the pupils of Lowood; I, therefore, direct that especialcare shall be bestowed on its cultivation amongst them. I have studiedhow best to mortify in them the worldly sentiment of pride; and, onlythe other day, I had a pleasing proof of my success. My seconddaughter, Augusta, went with her mama to visit the school, and on herreturn she exclaimed: ‘Oh, dear papa, how quiet and plain all the girlsat Lowood look, with their hair combed behind their ears, and theirlong pinafores, and those little holland pockets outside theirfrocks—they are almost like poor people’s children! and,’ said she,‘they looked at my dress and mama’s, as if they had never seen a silkgown before.’”“This is the state of things I quite approve,” returned Mrs. Reed; “hadI sought all England over, I could scarcely have found a system moreexactly fitting a child like Jane Eyre. Consistency, my dear Mr.Brocklehurst; I advocate consistency in all things.”“Consistency, madam, is the first of Christian duties; and it has beenobserved in every arrangement connected with the establishment ofLowood: plain fare, simple attire, unsophisticated accommodations,hardy and active habits; such is the order of the day in the house andits inhabitants.”“Quite right, sir. I may then depend upon this child being received asa pupil at Lowood, and there being trained in conformity to herposition and prospects?”“Madam, you may: she shall be placed in that nursery of chosen plants,and I trust she will show herself grateful for the inestimableprivilege of her election.”“I will send her, then, as soon as possible, Mr. Brocklehurst; for, Iassure you, I feel anxious to be relieved of a responsibility that wasbecoming too irksome.”“No doubt, no doubt, madam; and now I wish you good morning. I shallreturn to Brocklehurst Hall in the course of a week or two: my goodfriend, the Archdeacon, will not permit me to leave him sooner. I shallsend Miss Temple notice that she is to expect a new girl, so that therewill be no difficulty about receiving her. Good-bye.”“Good-bye, Mr. Brocklehurst; remember me to Mrs. and Miss Brocklehurst,and to Augusta and Theodore, and Master Broughton Brocklehurst.”“I will, madam. Little girl, here is a book entitled the ‘Child’sGuide’; read it with prayer, especially that part containing ‘Anaccount of the awfully sudden death of Martha G——, a naughty childaddicted to falsehood and deceit.’”With these words Mr. Brocklehurst put into my hand a thin pamphlet sewnin a cover, and having rung for his carriage, he departed.Mrs. Reed and I were left alone: some minutes passed in silence; shewas sewing, I was watching her. Mrs. Reed might be at that time somesix or seven and thirty; she was a woman of robust frame,square-shouldered and strong-limbed, not tall, and, though stout, notobese: she had a somewhat large face, the under jaw being muchdeveloped and very solid; her brow was low, her chin large andprominent, mouth and nose sufficiently regular; under her lighteyebrows glimmered an eye devoid of ruth; her skin was dark and opaque,her hair nearly flaxen; her constitution was sound as a bell—illnessnever came near her; she was an exact, clever manager; her householdand tenantry were thoroughly under her control; her children only attimes defied her authority and laughed it to scorn; she dressed well,and had a presence and port calculated to set off handsome attire.Sitting on a low stool, a few yards from her arm-chair, I examined herfigure; I perused her features. In my hand I held the tract containingthe sudden death of the Liar, to which narrative my attention had beenpointed as to an appropriate warning. What had just passed; what Mrs.Reed had said concerning me to Mr. Brocklehurst; the whole tenor oftheir conversation, was recent, raw, and stinging in my mind; I hadfelt every word as acutely as I had heard it plainly, and a passion ofresentment fomented now within me.Mrs. Reed looked up from her work; her eye settled on mine, her fingersat the same time suspended their nimble movements.“Go out of the room; return to the nursery,” was her mandate. My lookor something else must have struck her as offensive, for she spoke withextreme though suppressed irritation. I got up, I went to the door; Icame back again; I walked to the window, across the room, then close upto her._Speak_ I must: I had been trodden on severely, and _must_ turn: buthow? What strength had I to dart retaliation at my antagonist? Igathered my energies and launched them in this blunt sentence—“I am not deceitful: if I were, I should say I loved _you;_ but Ideclare I do not love you: I dislike you the worst of anybody in theworld except John Reed; and this book about the liar, you may give toyour girl, Georgiana, for it is she who tells lies, and not I.”Mrs. Reed’s hands still lay on her work inactive: her eye of icecontinued to dwell freezingly on mine.“What more have you to say?” she asked, rather in the tone in which aperson might address an opponent of adult age than such as isordinarily used to a child.That eye of hers, that voice stirred every antipathy I had. Shakingfrom head to foot, thrilled with ungovernable excitement, I continued—“I am glad you are no relation of mine: I will never call you auntagain as long as I live. I will never come to see you when I am grownup; and if any one asks me how I liked you, and how you treated me, Iwill say the very thought of you makes me sick, and that you treated mewith miserable cruelty.”“How dare you affirm that, Jane Eyre?”“How dare I, Mrs. Reed? How dare I? Because it is the _truth_. Youthink I have no feelings, and that I can do without one bit of love orkindness; but I cannot live so: and you have no pity. I shall rememberhow you thrust me back—roughly and violently thrust me back—into thered-room, and locked me up there, to my dying day; though I was inagony; though I cried out, while suffocating with distress, ‘Havemercy! Have mercy, Aunt Reed!’ And that punishment you made me sufferbecause your wicked boy struck me—knocked me down for nothing. I willtell anybody who asks me questions, this exact tale. People think you agood woman, but you are bad, hard-hearted. _You_ are deceitful!”How dare I, Mrs. Reed? How dare I? Because it is the truthEre I had finished this reply, my soul began to expand, to exult, withthe strangest sense of freedom, of triumph, I ever felt. It seemed asif an invisible bond had burst, and that I had struggled out intounhoped-for liberty. Not without cause was this sentiment: Mrs. Reedlooked frightened; her work had slipped from her knee; she was liftingup her hands, rocking herself to and fro, and even twisting her face asif she would cry.“Jane, you are under a mistake: what is the matter with you? Why do youtremble so violently? Would you like to drink some water?”“No, Mrs. Reed.”“Is there anything else you wish for, Jane? I assure you, I desire tobe your friend.”“Not you. You told Mr. Brocklehurst I had a bad character, a deceitfuldisposition; and I’ll let everybody at Lowood know what you are, andwhat you have done.”“Jane, you don’t understand these things: children must be correctedfor their faults.”“Deceit is not my fault!” I cried out in a savage, high voice.“But you are passionate, Jane, that you must allow: and now return tothe nursery—there’s a dear—and lie down a little.”“I am not your dear; I cannot lie down: send me to school soon, Mrs.Reed, for I hate to live here.”“I will indeed send her to school soon,” murmured Mrs. Reed _sottovoce_; and gathering up her work, she abruptly quitted the apartment.I was left there alone—winner of the field. It was the hardest battle Ihad fought, and the first victory I had gained: I stood awhile on therug, where Mr. Brocklehurst had stood, and I enjoyed my conqueror’ssolitude. First, I smiled to myself and felt elate; but this fiercepleasure subsided in me as fast as did the accelerated throb of mypulses. A child cannot quarrel with its elders, as I had done; cannotgive its furious feelings uncontrolled play, as I had given mine,without experiencing afterwards the pang of remorse and the chill ofreaction. A ridge of lighted heath, alive, glancing, devouring, wouldhave been a meet emblem of my mind when I accused and menaced Mrs.Reed: the same ridge, black and blasted after the flames are dead,would have represented as meetly my subsequent condition, whenhalf-an-hour’s silence and reflection had shown me the madness of myconduct, and the dreariness of my hated and hating position.Something of vengeance I had tasted for the first time; as aromaticwine it seemed, on swallowing, warm and racy: its after-flavour,metallic and corroding, gave me a sensation as if I had been poisoned.Willingly would I now have gone and asked Mrs. Reed’s pardon; but Iknew, partly from experience and partly from instinct, that was the wayto make her repulse me with double scorn, thereby re-exciting everyturbulent impulse of my nature.I would fain exercise some better faculty than that of fierce speaking;fain find nourishment for some less fiendish feeling than that ofsombre indignation. I took a book—some Arabian tales; I sat down andendeavoured to read. I could make no sense of the subject; my ownthoughts swam always between me and the page I had usually foundfascinating. I opened the glass-door in the breakfast-room: theshrubbery was quite still: the black frost reigned, unbroken by sun orbreeze, through the grounds. I covered my head and arms with the skirtof my frock, and went out to walk in a part of the plantation which wasquite sequestrated; but I found no pleasure in the silent trees, thefalling fir-cones, the congealed relics of autumn, russet leaves, sweptby past winds in heaps, and now stiffened together. I leaned against agate, and looked into an empty field where no sheep were feeding, wherethe short grass was nipped and blanched. It was a very grey day; a mostopaque sky, “onding on snaw,” canopied all; thence flakes fell atintervals, which settled on the hard path and on the hoary lea withoutmelting. I stood, a wretched child enough, whispering to myself overand over again, “What shall I do?—what shall I do?”All at once I heard a clear voice call, “Miss Jane! where are you? Cometo lunch!”It was Bessie, I knew well enough; but I did not stir; her light stepcame tripping down the path.“You naughty little thing!” she said. “Why don’t you come when you arecalled?”Bessie’s presence, compared with the thoughts over which I had beenbrooding, seemed cheerful; even though, as usual, she was somewhatcross. The fact is, after my conflict with and victory over Mrs. Reed,I was not disposed to care much for the nursemaid’s transitory anger;and I _was_ disposed to bask in her youthful lightness of heart. I justput my two arms round her and said, “Come, Bessie! don’t scold.”The action was more frank and fearless than any I was habituated toindulge in: somehow it pleased her.“You are a strange child, Miss Jane,” she said, as she looked down atme; “a little roving, solitary thing: and you are going to school, Isuppose?”I nodded.“And won’t you be sorry to leave poor Bessie?”“What does Bessie care for me? She is always scolding me.”“Because you’re such a queer, frightened, shy little thing. You shouldbe bolder.”“What! to get more knocks?”“Nonsense! But you are rather put upon, that’s certain. My mother said,when she came to see me last week, that she would not like a little oneof her own to be in your place.—Now, come in, and I’ve some good newsfor you.”“I don’t think you have, Bessie.”“Child! what do you mean? What sorrowful eyes you fix on me! Well, butMissis and the young ladies and Master John are going out to tea thisafternoon, and you shall have tea with me. I’ll ask cook to bake you alittle cake, and then you shall help me to look over your drawers; forI am soon to pack your trunk. Missis intends you to leave Gateshead ina day or two, and you shall choose what toys you like to take withyou.”“Bessie, you must promise not to scold me any more till I go.”“Well, I will; but mind you are a very good girl, and don’t be afraidof me. Don’t start when I chance to speak rather sharply; it’s soprovoking.”“I don’t think I shall ever be afraid of you again, Bessie, because Ihave got used to you, and I shall soon have another set of people todread.”“If you dread them they’ll dislike you.”“As you do, Bessie?”“I don’t dislike you, Miss; I believe I am fonder of you than of allthe others.”“You don’t show it.”“You little sharp thing! you’ve got quite a new way of talking. Whatmakes you so venturesome and hardy?”“Why, I shall soon be away from you, and besides”—I was going to saysomething about what had passed between me and Mrs. Reed, but on secondthoughts I considered it better to remain silent on that head.“And so you’re glad to leave me?”“Not at all, Bessie; indeed, just now I’m rather sorry.”“Just now! and rather! How coolly my little lady says it! I dare saynow if I were to ask you for a kiss you wouldn’t give it me: you’d sayyou’d _rather_ not.”“I’ll kiss you and welcome: bend your head down.” Bessie stooped; wemutually embraced, and I followed her into the house quite comforted.That afternoon lapsed in peace and harmony; and in the evening Bessietold me some of her most enchanting stories, and sang me some of hersweetest songs. Even for me life had its gleams of sunshine.CHAPTER VFive o’clock had hardly struck on the morning of the 19th of January,when Bessie brought a candle into my closet and found me already up andnearly dressed. I had risen half-an-hour before her entrance, and hadwashed my face, and put on my clothes by the light of a half-moon justsetting, whose rays streamed through the narrow window near my crib. Iwas to leave Gateshead that day by a coach which passed the lodge gatesat six A.M. Bessie was the only person yet risen; she had lit a fire inthe nursery, where she now proceeded to make my breakfast. Few childrencan eat when excited with the thoughts of a journey; nor could I.Bessie, having pressed me in vain to take a few spoonfuls of the boiledmilk and bread she had prepared for me, wrapped up some biscuits in apaper and put them into my bag; then she helped me on with my pelisseand bonnet, and wrapping herself in a shawl, she and I left thenursery. As we passed Mrs. Reed’s bedroom, she said, “Will you go inand bid Missis good-bye?”“No, Bessie: she came to my crib last night when you were gone down tosupper, and said I need not disturb her in the morning, or my cousinseither; and she told me to remember that she had always been my bestfriend, and to speak of her and be grateful to her accordingly.”“What did you say, Miss?”“Nothing: I covered my face with the bedclothes, and turned from her tothe wall.”“That was wrong, Miss Jane.”“It was quite right, Bessie. Your Missis has not been my friend: shehas been my foe.”“O Miss Jane! don’t say so!”“Good-bye to Gateshead!” cried I, as we passed through the hall andwent out at the front door.The moon was set, and it was very dark; Bessie carried a lantern, whoselight glanced on wet steps and gravel road sodden by a recent thaw. Rawand chill was the winter morning: my teeth chattered as I hastened downthe drive. There was a light in the porter’s lodge: when we reached it,we found the porter’s wife just kindling her fire: my trunk, which hadbeen carried down the evening before, stood corded at the door. Itwanted but a few minutes of six, and shortly after that hour hadstruck, the distant roll of wheels announced the coming coach; I wentto the door and watched its lamps approach rapidly through the gloom.“Is she going by herself?” asked the porter’s wife.“Yes.”“And how far is it?”“Fifty miles.”“What a long way! I wonder Mrs. Reed is not afraid to trust her so faralone.”The coach drew up; there it was at the gates with its four horses andits top laden with passengers: the guard and coachman loudly urgedhaste; my trunk was hoisted up; I was taken from Bessie’s neck, towhich I clung with kisses.“Be sure and take good care of her,” cried she to the guard, as helifted me into the inside.“Ay, ay!” was the answer: the door was slapped to, a voice exclaimed“All right,” and on we drove. Thus was I severed from Bessie andGateshead; thus whirled away to unknown, and, as I then deemed, remoteand mysterious regions.I remember but little of the journey; I only know that the day seemedto me of a preternatural length, and that we appeared to travel overhundreds of miles of road. We passed through several towns, and in one,a very large one, the coach stopped; the horses were taken out, and thepassengers alighted to dine. I was carried into an inn, where the guardwanted me to have some dinner; but, as I had no appetite, he left me inan immense room with a fireplace at each end, a chandelier pendent fromthe ceiling, and a little red gallery high up against the wall filledwith musical instruments. Here I walked about for a long time, feelingvery strange, and mortally apprehensive of some one coming in andkidnapping me; for I believed in kidnappers, their exploits havingfrequently figured in Bessie’s fireside chronicles. At last the guardreturned; once more I was stowed away in the coach, my protectormounted his own seat, sounded his hollow horn, and away we rattled overthe “stony street” of L——.The afternoon came on wet and somewhat misty: as it waned into dusk, Ibegan to feel that we were getting very far indeed from Gateshead: weceased to pass through towns; the country changed; great grey hillsheaved up round the horizon: as twilight deepened, we descended avalley, dark with wood, and long after night had overclouded theprospect, I heard a wild wind rushing amongst trees.Lulled by the sound, I at last dropped asleep; I had not long slumberedwhen the sudden cessation of motion awoke me; the coach-door was open,and a person like a servant was standing at it: I saw her face anddress by the light of the lamps.“Is there a little girl called Jane Eyre here?” she asked. I answered“Yes,” and was then lifted out; my trunk was handed down, and the coachinstantly drove away.I was stiff with long sitting, and bewildered with the noise and motionof the coach: gathering my faculties, I looked about me. Rain, wind,and darkness filled the air; nevertheless, I dimly discerned a wallbefore me and a door open in it; through this door I passed with my newguide: she shut and locked it behind her. There was now visible a houseor houses—for the building spread far—with many windows, and lightsburning in some; we went up a broad pebbly path, splashing wet, andwere admitted at a door; then the servant led me through a passage intoa room with a fire, where she left me alone.I stood and warmed my numbed fingers over the blaze, then I lookedround; there was no candle, but the uncertain light from the hearthshowed, by intervals, papered walls, carpet, curtains, shining mahoganyfurniture: it was a parlour, not so spacious or splendid as thedrawing-room at Gateshead, but comfortable enough. I was puzzling tomake out the subject of a picture on the wall, when the door opened,and an individual carrying a light entered; another followed closebehind.The first was a tall lady with dark hair, dark eyes, and a pale andlarge forehead; her figure was partly enveloped in a shawl, hercountenance was grave, her bearing erect.“The child is very young to be sent alone,” said she, putting hercandle down on the table. She considered me attentively for a minute ortwo, then further added—“She had better be put to bed soon; she looks tired: are you tired?”she asked, placing her hand on my shoulder.“A little, ma’am.”“And hungry too, no doubt: let her have some supper before she goes tobed, Miss Miller. Is this the first time you have left your parents tocome to school, my little girl?”I explained to her that I had no parents. She inquired how long theyhad been dead: then how old I was, what was my name, whether I couldread, write, and sew a little: then she touched my cheek gently withher forefinger, and saying, “She hoped I should be a good child,”dismissed me along with Miss Miller.The lady I had left might be about twenty-nine; the one who went withme appeared some years younger: the first impressed me by her voice,look, and air. Miss Miller was more ordinary; ruddy in complexion,though of a careworn countenance; hurried in gait and action, like onewho had always a multiplicity of tasks on hand: she looked, indeed,what I afterwards found she really was, an under-teacher. Led by her, Ipassed from compartment to compartment, from passage to passage, of alarge and irregular building; till, emerging from the total andsomewhat dreary silence pervading that portion of the house we hadtraversed, we came upon the hum of many voices, and presently entered awide, long room, with great deal tables, two at each end, on each ofwhich burnt a pair of candles, and seated all round on benches, acongregation of girls of every age, from nine or ten to twenty. Seen bythe dim light of the dips, their number to me appeared countless,though not in reality exceeding eighty; they were uniformly dressed inbrown stuff frocks of quaint fashion, and long holland pinafores. Itwas the hour of study; they were engaged in conning over theirto-morrow’s task, and the hum I had heard was the combined result oftheir whispered repetitions.Miss Miller signed to me to sit on a bench near the door, then walkingup to the top of the long room she cried out—“Monitors, collect the lesson-books and put them away!”Four tall girls arose from different tables, and going round, gatheredthe books and removed them. Miss Miller again gave the word of command—“Monitors, fetch the supper-trays!”The tall girls went out and returned presently, each bearing a tray,with portions of something, I knew not what, arranged thereon, and apitcher of water and mug in the middle of each tray. The portions werehanded round; those who liked took a draught of the water, the mugbeing common to all. When it came to my turn, I drank, for I wasthirsty, but did not touch the food, excitement and fatigue renderingme incapable of eating: I now saw, however, that it was a thin oatencake shared into fragments.The meal over, prayers were read by Miss Miller, and the classes filedoff, two and two, upstairs. Overpowered by this time with weariness, Iscarcely noticed what sort of a place the bedroom was, except that,like the schoolroom, I saw it was very long. To-night I was to be MissMiller’s bed-fellow; she helped me to undress: when laid down I glancedat the long rows of beds, each of which was quickly filled with twooccupants; in ten minutes the single light was extinguished, and amidstsilence and complete darkness I fell asleep.The night passed rapidly: I was too tired even to dream; I only onceawoke to hear the wind rave in furious gusts, and the rain fall intorrents, and to be sensible that Miss Miller had taken her place by myside. When I again unclosed my eyes, a loud bell was ringing; the girlswere up and dressing; day had not yet begun to dawn, and a rushlight ortwo burned in the room. I too rose reluctantly; it was bitter cold, andI dressed as well as I could for shivering, and washed when there was abasin at liberty, which did not occur soon, as there was but one basinto six girls, on the stands down the middle of the room. Again the bellrang: all formed in file, two and two, and in that order descended thestairs and entered the cold and dimly lit schoolroom: here prayers wereread by Miss Miller; afterwards she called out—“Form classes!”A great tumult succeeded for some minutes, during which Miss Millerrepeatedly exclaimed, “Silence!” and “Order!” When it subsided, I sawthem all drawn up in four semicircles, before four chairs, placed atthe four tables; all held books in their hands, and a great book, likea Bible, lay on each table, before the vacant seat. A pause of someseconds succeeded, filled up by the low, vague hum of numbers; MissMiller walked from class to class, hushing this indefinite sound.A distant bell tinkled: immediately three ladies entered the room, eachwalked to a table and took her seat; Miss Miller assumed the fourthvacant chair, which was that nearest the door, and around which thesmallest of the children were assembled: to this inferior class I wascalled, and placed at the bottom of it.Business now began: the day’s Collect was repeated, then certain textsof Scripture were said, and to these succeeded a protracted reading ofchapters in the Bible, which lasted an hour. By the time that exercisewas terminated, day had fully dawned. The indefatigable bell nowsounded for the fourth time: the classes were marshalled and marchedinto another room to breakfast: how glad I was to behold a prospect ofgetting something to eat! I was now nearly sick from inanition, havingtaken so little the day before.The refectory was a great, low-ceiled, gloomy room; on two long tablessmoked basins of something hot, which, however, to my dismay, sentforth an odour far from inviting. I saw a universal manifestation ofdiscontent when the fumes of the repast met the nostrils of thosedestined to swallow it; from the van of the procession, the tall girlsof the first class, rose the whispered words—“Disgusting! The porridge is burnt again!”“Silence!” ejaculated a voice; not that of Miss Miller, but one of theupper teachers, a little and dark personage, smartly dressed, but ofsomewhat morose aspect, who installed herself at the top of one table,while a more buxom lady presided at the other. I looked in vain for herI had first seen the night before; she was not visible: Miss Milleroccupied the foot of the table where I sat, and a strange,foreign-looking, elderly lady, the French teacher, as I afterwardsfound, took the corresponding seat at the other board. A long grace wassaid and a hymn sung; then a servant brought in some tea for theteachers, and the meal began.Ravenous, and now very faint, I devoured a spoonful or two of myportion without thinking of its taste; but the first edge of hungerblunted, I perceived I had got in hand a nauseous mess; burnt porridgeis almost as bad as rotten potatoes; famine itself soon sickens overit. The spoons were moved slowly: I saw each girl taste her food andtry to swallow it; but in most cases the effort was soon relinquished.Breakfast was over, and none had breakfasted. Thanks being returned forwhat we had not got, and a second hymn chanted, the refectory wasevacuated for the schoolroom. I was one of the last to go out, and inpassing the tables, I saw one teacher take a basin of the porridge andtaste it; she looked at the others; all their countenances expresseddispleasure, and one of them, the stout one, whispered—“Abominable stuff! How shameful!”A quarter of an hour passed before lessons again began, during whichthe schoolroom was in a glorious tumult; for that space of time itseemed to be permitted to talk loud and more freely, and they usedtheir privilege. The whole conversation ran on the breakfast, which oneand all abused roundly. Poor things! it was the sole consolation theyhad. Miss Miller was now the only teacher in the room: a group of greatgirls standing about her spoke with serious and sullen gestures. Iheard the name of Mr. Brocklehurst pronounced by some lips; at whichMiss Miller shook her head disapprovingly; but she made no great effortto check the general wrath; doubtless she shared in it.A clock in the schoolroom struck nine; Miss Miller left her circle, andstanding in the middle of the room, cried—“Silence! To your seats!”Discipline prevailed: in five minutes the confused throng was resolvedinto order, and comparative silence quelled the Babel clamour oftongues. The upper teachers now punctually resumed their posts: butstill, all seemed to wait. Ranged on benches down the sides of theroom, the eighty girls sat motionless and erect; a quaint assemblagethey appeared, all with plain locks combed from their faces, not a curlvisible; in brown dresses, made high and surrounded by a narrow tuckerabout the throat, with little pockets of holland (shaped something likea Highlander’s purse) tied in front of their frocks, and destined toserve the purpose of a work-bag: all, too, wearing woollen stockingsand country-made shoes, fastened with brass buckles. Above twenty ofthose clad in this costume were full-grown girls, or rather youngwomen; it suited them ill, and gave an air of oddity even to theprettiest.I was still looking at them, and also at intervals examining theteachers—none of whom precisely pleased me; for the stout one was alittle coarse, the dark one not a little fierce, the foreigner harshand grotesque, and Miss Miller, poor thing! looked purple,weather-beaten, and over-worked—when, as my eye wandered from face toface, the whole school rose simultaneously, as if moved by a commonspring.What was the matter? I had heard no order given: I was puzzled. Ere Ihad gathered my wits, the classes were again seated: but as all eyeswere now turned to one point, mine followed the general direction, andencountered the personage who had received me last night. She stood atthe bottom of the long room, on the hearth; for there was a fire ateach end; she surveyed the two rows of girls silently and gravely. MissMiller approaching, seemed to ask her a question, and having receivedher answer, went back to her place, and said aloud—“Monitor of the first class, fetch the globes!”While the direction was being executed, the lady consulted moved slowlyup the room. I suppose I have a considerable organ of veneration, for Iretain yet the sense of admiring awe with which my eyes traced hersteps. Seen now, in broad daylight, she looked tall, fair, and shapely;brown eyes with a benignant light in their irids, and a fine pencillingof long lashes round, relieved the whiteness of her large front; oneach of her temples her hair, of a very dark brown, was clustered inround curls, according to the fashion of those times, when neithersmooth bands nor long ringlets were in vogue; her dress, also in themode of the day, was of purple cloth, relieved by a sort of Spanishtrimming of black velvet; a gold watch (watches were not so common thenas now) shone at her girdle. Let the reader add, to complete thepicture, refined features; a complexion, if pale, clear; and a statelyair and carriage, and he will have, at least, as clearly as words cangive it, a correct idea of the exterior of Miss Temple—Maria Temple, asI afterwards saw the name written in a prayer-book intrusted to me tocarry to church.The superintendent of Lowood (for such was this lady) having taken herseat before a pair of globes placed on one of the tables, summoned thefirst class round her, and commenced giving a lesson on geography; thelower classes were called by the teachers: repetitions in history,grammar, &c., went on for an hour; writing and arithmetic succeeded,and music lessons were given by Miss Temple to some of the elder girls.The duration of each lesson was measured by the clock, which at laststruck twelve. The superintendent rose—“I have a word to address to the pupils,” said she.The tumult of cessation from lessons was already breaking forth, but itsank at her voice. She went on—“You had this morning a breakfast which you could not eat; you must behungry:—I have ordered that a lunch of bread and cheese shall be servedto all.”The teachers looked at her with a sort of surprise.“It is to be done on my responsibility,” she added, in an explanatorytone to them, and immediately afterwards left the room.The bread and cheese was presently brought in and distributed, to thehigh delight and refreshment of the whole school. The order was nowgiven “To the garden!” Each put on a coarse straw bonnet, with stringsof coloured calico, and a cloak of grey frieze. I was similarlyequipped, and, following the stream, I made my way into the open air.The garden was a wide inclosure, surrounded with walls so high as toexclude every glimpse of prospect; a covered verandah ran down oneside, and broad walks bordered a middle space divided into scores oflittle beds: these beds were assigned as gardens for the pupils tocultivate, and each bed had an owner. When full of flowers they woulddoubtless look pretty; but now, at the latter end of January, all waswintry blight and brown decay. I shuddered as I stood and looked roundme: it was an inclement day for outdoor exercise; not positively rainy,but darkened by a drizzling yellow fog; all under foot was stillsoaking wet with the floods of yesterday. The stronger among the girlsran about and engaged in active games, but sundry pale and thin onesherded together for shelter and warmth in the verandah; and amongstthese, as the dense mist penetrated to their shivering frames, I heardfrequently the sound of a hollow cough.As yet I had spoken to no one, nor did anybody seem to take notice ofme; I stood lonely enough: but to that feeling of isolation I wasaccustomed; it did not oppress me much. I leant against a pillar of theverandah, drew my grey mantle close about me, and, trying to forget thecold which nipped me without, and the unsatisfied hunger which gnawedme within, delivered myself up to the employment of watching andthinking. My reflections were too undefined and fragmentary to meritrecord: I hardly yet knew where I was; Gateshead and my past lifeseemed floated away to an immeasurable distance; the present was vagueand strange, and of the future I could form no conjecture. I lookedround the convent-like garden, and then up at the house—a largebuilding, half of which seemed grey and old, the other half quite new.The new part, containing the schoolroom and dormitory, was lit bymullioned and latticed windows, which gave it a church-like aspect; astone tablet over the door bore this inscription:—LOWOOD INSTITUTION.This portion was rebuilt A.D. ——, by Naomi Brocklehurst,of Brocklehurst Hall, in this county.“Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works,and glorify your Father which is in heaven.”—St. Matt. v. 16.I read these words over and over again: I felt that an explanationbelonged to them, and was unable fully to penetrate their import. I wasstill pondering the signification of “Institution,” and endeavouring tomake out a connection between the first words and the verse ofScripture, when the sound of a cough close behind me made me turn myhead. I saw a girl sitting on a stone bench near; she was bent over abook, on the perusal of which she seemed intent: from where I stood Icould see the title—it was “Rasselas;” a name that struck me asstrange, and consequently attractive. In turning a leaf she happened tolook up, and I said to her directly—“Is your book interesting?” I had already formed the intention ofasking her to lend it to me some day.“I like it,” she answered, after a pause of a second or two, duringwhich she examined me.“What is it about?” I continued. I hardly know where I found thehardihood thus to open a conversation with a stranger; the step wascontrary to my nature and habits: but I think her occupation touched achord of sympathy somewhere; for I too liked reading, though of afrivolous and childish kind; I could not digest or comprehend theserious or substantial.“You may look at it,” replied the girl, offering me the book.I did so; a brief examination convinced me that the contents were lesstaking than the title: “Rasselas” looked dull to my trifling taste; Isaw nothing about fairies, nothing about genii; no bright varietyseemed spread over the closely-printed pages. I returned it to her; shereceived it quietly, and without saying anything she was about torelapse into her former studious mood: again I ventured to disturb her—“Can you tell me what the writing on that stone over the door means?What is Lowood Institution?”“This house where you are come to live.”“And why do they call it Institution? Is it in any way different fromother schools?”“It is partly a charity-school: you and I, and all the rest of us, arecharity-children. I suppose you are an orphan: are not either yourfather or your mother dead?”“Both died before I can remember.”“Well, all the girls here have lost either one or both parents, andthis is called an institution for educating orphans.”“Do we pay no money? Do they keep us for nothing?”“We pay, or our friends pay, fifteen pounds a year for each.”“Then why do they call us charity-children?”“Because fifteen pounds is not enough for board and teaching, and thedeficiency is supplied by subscription.”“Who subscribes?”“Different benevolent-minded ladies and gentlemen in this neighbourhoodand in London.”“Who was Naomi Brocklehurst?”“The lady who built the new part of this house as that tablet records,and whose son overlooks and directs everything here.”“Why?”“Because he is treasurer and manager of the establishment.”“Then this house does not belong to that tall lady who wears a watch,and who said we were to have some bread and cheese?”“To Miss Temple? Oh, no! I wish it did: she has to answer to Mr.Brocklehurst for all she does. Mr. Brocklehurst buys all our food andall our clothes.”“Does he live here?”“No—two miles off, at a large hall.”“Is he a good man?”“He is a clergyman, and is said to do a great deal of good.”“Did you say that tall lady was called Miss Temple?”“Yes.”“And what are the other teachers called?”“The one with red cheeks is called Miss Smith; she attends to the work,and cuts out—for we make our own clothes, our frocks, and pelisses, andeverything; the little one with black hair is Miss Scatcherd; sheteaches history and grammar, and hears the second class repetitions;and the one who wears a shawl, and has a pocket-handkerchief tied toher side with a yellow ribband, is Madame Pierrot: she comes fromLisle, in France, and teaches French.”“Do you like the teachers?”“Well enough.”“Do you like the little black one, and the Madame ——?—I cannotpronounce her name as you do.”“Miss Scatcherd is hasty—you must take care not to offend her; MadamePierrot is not a bad sort of person.”“But Miss Temple is the best—isn’t she?”“Miss Temple is very good and very clever; she is above the rest,because she knows far more than they do.”“Have you been long here?”“Two years.”“Are you an orphan?”“My mother is dead.”“Are you happy here?”“You ask rather too many questions. I have given you answers enough forthe present: now I want to read.”But at that moment the summons sounded for dinner; all re-entered thehouse. The odour which now filled the refectory was scarcely moreappetising than that which had regaled our nostrils at breakfast: thedinner was served in two huge tin-plated vessels, whence rose a strongsteam redolent of rancid fat. I found the mess to consist ofindifferent potatoes and strange shreds of rusty meat, mixed and cookedtogether. Of this preparation a tolerably abundant plateful wasapportioned to each pupil. I ate what I could, and wondered withinmyself whether every day’s fare would be like this.After dinner, we immediately adjourned to the schoolroom: lessonsrecommenced, and were continued till five o’clock.The only marked event of the afternoon was, that I saw the girl withwhom I had conversed in the verandah dismissed in disgrace by MissScatcherd from a history class, and sent to stand in the middle of thelarge schoolroom. The punishment seemed to me in a high degreeignominious, especially for so great a girl—she looked thirteen orupwards. I expected she would show signs of great distress and shame;but to my surprise she neither wept nor blushed: composed, thoughgrave, she stood, the central mark of all eyes. “How can she bear it soquietly—so firmly?” I asked of myself. “Were I in her place, it seemsto me I should wish the earth to open and swallow me up. She looks asif she were thinking of something beyond her punishment—beyond hersituation: of something not round her nor before her. I have heard ofday-dreams—is she in a day-dream now? Her eyes are fixed on the floor,but I am sure they do not see it—her sight seems turned in, gone downinto her heart: she is looking at what she can remember, I believe; notat what is really present. I wonder what sort of a girl she is—whethergood or naughty.”Soon after five P.M. we had another meal, consisting of a small mug ofcoffee, and half-a-slice of brown bread. I devoured my bread and drankmy coffee with relish; but I should have been glad of as much more—Iwas still hungry. Half-an-hour’s recreation succeeded, then study; thenthe glass of water and the piece of oat-cake, prayers, and bed. Suchwas my first day at Lowood.CHAPTER VIThe next day commenced as before, getting up and dressing by rushlight;but this morning we were obliged to dispense with the ceremony ofwashing; the water in the pitchers was frozen. A change had taken placein the weather the preceding evening, and a keen north-east wind,whistling through the crevices of our bedroom windows all night long,had made us shiver in our beds, and turned the contents of the ewers toice.Before the long hour and a half of prayers and Bible-reading was over,I felt ready to perish with cold. Breakfast-time came at last, and thismorning the porridge was not burnt; the quality was eatable, thequantity small. How small my portion seemed! I wished it had beendoubled.In the course of the day I was enrolled a member of the fourth class,and regular tasks and occupations were assigned me: hitherto, I hadonly been a spectator of the proceedings at Lowood; I was now to becomean actor therein. At first, being little accustomed to learn by heart,the lessons appeared to me both long and difficult; the frequent changefrom task to task, too, bewildered me; and I was glad when, about threeo’clock in the afternoon, Miss Smith put into my hands a border ofmuslin two yards long, together with needle, thimble, &c., and sent meto sit in a quiet corner of the schoolroom, with directions to hem thesame. At that hour most of the others were sewing likewise; but oneclass still stood round Miss Scatcherd’s chair reading, and as all wasquiet, the subject of their lessons could be heard, together with themanner in which each girl acquitted herself, and the animadversions orcommendations of Miss Scatcherd on the performance. It was Englishhistory: among the readers I observed my acquaintance of the verandah:at the commencement of the lesson, her place had been at the top of theclass, but for some error of pronunciation, or some inattention tostops, she was suddenly sent to the very bottom. Even in that obscureposition, Miss Scatcherd continued to make her an object of constantnotice: she was continually addressing to her such phrases as thefollowing:—“Burns” (such it seems was her name: the girls here were all called bytheir surnames, as boys are elsewhere), “Burns, you are standing on theside of your shoe; turn your toes out immediately.” “Burns, you pokeyour chin most unpleasantly; draw it in.” “Burns, I insist on yourholding your head up; I will not have you before me in that attitude,”&c. &c.A chapter having been read through twice, the books were closed and thegirls examined. The lesson had comprised part of the reign of CharlesI., and there were sundry questions about tonnage and poundage andship-money, which most of them appeared unable to answer; still, everylittle difficulty was solved instantly when it reached Burns: hermemory seemed to have retained the substance of the whole lesson, andshe was ready with answers on every point. I kept expecting that MissScatcherd would praise her attention; but, instead of that, shesuddenly cried out—“You dirty, disagreeable girl! you have never cleaned your nails thismorning!”Burns made no answer: I wondered at her silence.“Why,” thought I, “does she not explain that she could neither cleanher nails nor wash her face, as the water was frozen?”My attention was now called off by Miss Smith desiring me to hold askein of thread: while she was winding it, she talked to me from timeto time, asking whether I had ever been at school before, whether Icould mark, stitch, knit, &c.; till she dismissed me, I could notpursue my observations on Miss Scatcherd’s movements. When I returnedto my seat, that lady was just delivering an order of which I did notcatch the import; but Burns immediately left the class, and going intothe small inner room where the books were kept, returned in half aminute, carrying in her hand a bundle of twigs tied together at oneend. This ominous tool she presented to Miss Scatcherd with arespectful curtesy; then she quietly, and without being told, unloosedher pinafore, and the teacher instantly and sharply inflicted on herneck a dozen strokes with the bunch of twigs. Not a tear rose to Burns’eye; and, while I paused from my sewing, because my fingers quivered atthis spectacle with a sentiment of unavailing and impotent anger, not afeature of her pensive face altered its ordinary expression.“Hardened girl!” exclaimed Miss Scatcherd; “nothing can correct you ofyour slatternly habits: carry the rod away.”Burns obeyed: I looked at her narrowly as she emerged from thebook-closet; she was just putting back her handkerchief into herpocket, and the trace of a tear glistened on her thin cheek.The play-hour in the evening I thought the pleasantest fraction of theday at Lowood: the bit of bread, the draught of coffee swallowed atfive o’clock had revived vitality, if it had not satisfied hunger: thelong restraint of the day was slackened; the schoolroom felt warmerthan in the morning—its fires being allowed to burn a little morebrightly, to supply, in some measure, the place of candles, not yetintroduced: the ruddy gloaming, the licensed uproar, the confusion ofmany voices gave one a welcome sense of liberty.On the evening of the day on which I had seen Miss Scatcherd flog herpupil, Burns, I wandered as usual among the forms and tables andlaughing groups without a companion, yet not feeling lonely: when Ipassed the windows, I now and then lifted a blind, and looked out; itsnowed fast, a drift was already forming against the lower panes;putting my ear close to the window, I could distinguish from thegleeful tumult within, the disconsolate moan of the wind outside.Probably, if I had lately left a good home and kind parents, this wouldhave been the hour when I should most keenly have regretted theseparation; that wind would then have saddened my heart; this obscurechaos would have disturbed my peace! as it was, I derived from both astrange excitement, and reckless and feverish, I wished the wind tohowl more wildly, the gloom to deepen to darkness, and the confusion torise to clamour.Jumping over forms, and creeping under tables, I made my way to one ofthe fire-places; there, kneeling by the high wire fender, I foundBurns, absorbed, silent, abstracted from all round her by thecompanionship of a book, which she read by the dim glare of the embers.“Is it still ‘Rasselas’?” I asked, coming behind her.“Yes,” she said, “and I have just finished it.”And in five minutes more she shut it up. I was glad of this.“Now,” thought I, “I can perhaps get her to talk.” I sat down by her onthe floor.“What is your name besides Burns?”“Helen.”“Do you come a long way from here?”“I come from a place farther north, quite on the borders of Scotland.”“Will you ever go back?”“I hope so; but nobody can be sure of the future.”“You must wish to leave Lowood?”“No! why should I? I was sent to Lowood to get an education; and itwould be of no use going away until I have attained that object.”“But that teacher, Miss Scatcherd, is so cruel to you?”“Cruel? Not at all! She is severe: she dislikes my faults.”“And if I were in your place I should dislike her; I should resist her.If she struck me with that rod, I should get it from her hand; I shouldbreak it under her nose.”“Probably you would do nothing of the sort: but if you did, Mr.Brocklehurst would expel you from the school; that would be a greatgrief to your relations. It is far better to endure patiently a smartwhich nobody feels but yourself, than to commit a hasty action whoseevil consequences will extend to all connected with you; and besides,the Bible bids us return good for evil.”“But then it seems disgraceful to be flogged, and to be sent to standin the middle of a room full of people; and you are such a great girl:I am far younger than you, and I could not bear it.”“Yet it would be your duty to bear it, if you could not avoid it: it isweak and silly to say you _cannot bear_ what it is your fate to berequired to bear.”I heard her with wonder: I could not comprehend this doctrine ofendurance; and still less could I understand or sympathise with theforbearance she expressed for her chastiser. Still I felt that HelenBurns considered things by a light invisible to my eyes. I suspectedshe might be right and I wrong; but I would not ponder the matterdeeply; like Felix, I put it off to a more convenient season.“You say you have faults, Helen: what are they? To me you seem verygood.”“Then learn from me, not to judge by appearances: I am, as MissScatcherd said, slatternly; I seldom put, and never keep, things inorder; I am careless; I forget rules; I read when I should learn mylessons; I have no method; and sometimes I say, like you, I cannot_bear_ to be subjected to systematic arrangements. This is all veryprovoking to Miss Scatcherd, who is naturally neat, punctual, andparticular.”“And cross and cruel,” I added; but Helen Burns would not admit myaddition: she kept silence.“Is Miss Temple as severe to you as Miss Scatcherd?”At the utterance of Miss Temple’s name, a soft smile flitted over hergrave face.“Miss Temple is full of goodness; it pains her to be severe to any one,even the worst in the school: she sees my errors, and tells me of themgently; and, if I do anything worthy of praise, she gives me my meedliberally. One strong proof of my wretchedly defective nature is, thateven her expostulations, so mild, so rational, have not influence tocure me of my faults; and even her praise, though I value it mosthighly, cannot stimulate me to continued care and foresight.”“That is curious,” said I, “it is so easy to be careful.”“For _you_ I have no doubt it is. I observed you in your class thismorning, and saw you were closely attentive: your thoughts never seemedto wander while Miss Miller explained the lesson and questioned you.Now, mine continually rove away; when I should be listening to MissScatcherd, and collecting all she says with assiduity, often I lose thevery sound of her voice; I fall into a sort of dream. Sometimes I thinkI am in Northumberland, and that the noises I hear round me are thebubbling of a little brook which runs through Deepden, near ourhouse;—then, when it comes to my turn to reply, I have to be awakened;and having heard nothing of what was read for listening to thevisionary brook, I have no answer ready.”“Yet how well you replied this afternoon.”“It was mere chance; the subject on which we had been reading hadinterested me. This afternoon, instead of dreaming of Deepden, I waswondering how a man who wished to do right could act so unjustly andunwisely as Charles the First sometimes did; and I thought what a pityit was that, with his integrity and conscientiousness, he could see nofarther than the prerogatives of the crown. If he had but been able tolook to a distance, and see how what they call the spirit of the agewas tending! Still, I like Charles—I respect him—I pity him, poormurdered king! Yes, his enemies were the worst: they shed blood theyhad no right to shed. How dared they kill him!”Helen was talking to herself now: she had forgotten I could not verywell understand her—that I was ignorant, or nearly so, of the subjectshe discussed. I recalled her to my level.“And when Miss Temple teaches you, do your thoughts wander then?”“No, certainly, not often; because Miss Temple has generally somethingto say which is newer than my own reflections; her language issingularly agreeable to me, and the information she communicates isoften just what I wished to gain.”“Well, then, with Miss Temple you are good?”“Yes, in a passive way: I make no effort; I follow as inclinationguides me. There is no merit in such goodness.”“A great deal: you are good to those who are good to you. It is all Iever desire to be. If people were always kind and obedient to those whoare cruel and unjust, the wicked people would have it all their ownway: they would never feel afraid, and so they would never alter, butwould grow worse and worse. When we are struck at without a reason, weshould strike back again very hard; I am sure we should—so hard as toteach the person who struck us never to do it again.”“You will change your mind, I hope, when you grow older: as yet you arebut a little untaught girl.”“But I feel this, Helen; I must dislike those who, whatever I do toplease them, persist in disliking me; I must resist those who punish meunjustly. It is as natural as that I should love those who show meaffection, or submit to punishment when I feel it is deserved.”“Heathens and savage tribes hold that doctrine, but Christians andcivilised nations disown it.”“How? I don’t understand.”“It is not violence that best overcomes hate—nor vengeance that mostcertainly heals injury.”“What then?”“Read the New Testament, and observe what Christ says, and how He acts;make His word your rule, and His conduct your example.”“What does He say?”“Love your enemies; bless them that curse you; do good to them thathate you and despitefully use you.”“Then I should love Mrs. Reed, which I cannot do; I should bless herson John, which is impossible.”In her turn, Helen Burns asked me to explain, and I proceeded forthwithto pour out, in my own way, the tale of my sufferings and resentments.Bitter and truculent when excited, I spoke as I felt, without reserveor softening.Helen heard me patiently to the end: I expected she would then make aremark, but she said nothing.“Well,” I asked impatiently, “is not Mrs. Reed a hard-hearted, badwoman?”“She has been unkind to you, no doubt; because you see, she dislikesyour cast of character, as Miss Scatcherd does mine; but how minutelyyou remember all she has done and said to you! What a singularly deepimpression her injustice seems to have made on your heart! No ill-usageso brands its record on my feelings. Would you not be happier if youtried to forget her severity, together with the passionate emotions itexcited? Life appears to me too short to be spent in nursing animosityor registering wrongs. We are, and must be, one and all, burdened withfaults in this world: but the time will soon come when, I trust, weshall put them off in putting off our corruptible bodies; whendebasement and sin will fall from us with this cumbrous frame of flesh,and only the spark of the spirit will remain,—the impalpable principleof light and thought, pure as when it left the Creator to inspire thecreature: whence it came it will return; perhaps again to becommunicated to some being higher than man—perhaps to pass throughgradations of glory, from the pale human soul to brighten to theseraph! Surely it will never, on the contrary, be suffered todegenerate from man to fiend? No; I cannot believe that: I hold anothercreed: which no one ever taught me, and which I seldom mention; but inwhich I delight, and to which I cling: for it extends hope to all: itmakes Eternity a rest—a mighty home, not a terror and an abyss.Besides, with this creed, I can so clearly distinguish between thecriminal and his crime; I can so sincerely forgive the first while Iabhor the last: with this creed revenge never worries my heart,degradation never too deeply disgusts me, injustice never crushes metoo low: I live in calm, looking to the end.”Helen’s head, always drooping, sank a little lower as she finished thissentence. I saw by her look she wished no longer to talk to me, butrather to converse with her own thoughts. She was not allowed much timefor meditation: a monitor, a great rough girl, presently came up,exclaiming in a strong Cumberland accent—“Helen Burns, if you don’t go and put your drawer in order, and fold upyour work this minute, I’ll tell Miss Scatcherd to come and look atit!”Helen sighed as her reverie fled, and getting up, obeyed the monitorwithout reply as without delay.CHAPTER VIIMy first quarter at Lowood seemed an age; and not the golden ageeither; it comprised an irksome struggle with difficulties inhabituating myself to new rules and unwonted tasks. The fear of failurein these points harassed me worse than the physical hardships of mylot; though these were no trifles.During January, February, and part of March, the deep snows, and, aftertheir melting, the almost impassable roads, prevented our stirringbeyond the garden walls, except to go to church; but within theselimits we had to pass an hour every day in the open air. Our clothingwas insufficient to protect us from the severe cold: we had no boots,the snow got into our shoes and melted there: our ungloved hands becamenumbed and covered with chilblains, as were our feet: I remember wellthe distracting irritation I endured from this cause every evening,when my feet inflamed; and the torture of thrusting the swelled, raw,and stiff toes into my shoes in the morning. Then the scanty supply offood was distressing: with the keen appetites of growing children, wehad scarcely sufficient to keep alive a delicate invalid. From thisdeficiency of nourishment resulted an abuse, which pressed hardly onthe younger pupils: whenever the famished great girls had anopportunity, they would coax or menace the little ones out of theirportion. Many a time I have shared between two claimants the preciousmorsel of brown bread distributed at tea-time; and after relinquishingto a third half the contents of my mug of coffee, I have swallowed theremainder with an accompaniment of secret tears, forced from me by theexigency of hunger.Sundays were dreary days in that wintry season. We had to walk twomiles to Brocklebridge Church, where our patron officiated. We set outcold, we arrived at church colder: during the morning service we becamealmost paralysed. It was too far to return to dinner, and an allowanceof cold meat and bread, in the same penurious proportion observed inour ordinary meals, was served round between the services.At the close of the afternoon service we returned by an exposed andhilly road, where the bitter winter wind, blowing over a range of snowysummits to the north, almost flayed the skin from our faces.I can remember Miss Temple walking lightly and rapidly along ourdrooping line, her plaid cloak, which the frosty wind fluttered,gathered close about her, and encouraging us, by precept and example,to keep up our spirits, and march forward, as she said, “like stalwartsoldiers.” The other teachers, poor things, were generally themselvestoo much dejected to attempt the task of cheering others.How we longed for the light and heat of a blazing fire when we gotback! But, to the little ones at least, this was denied: each hearth inthe schoolroom was immediately surrounded by a double row of greatgirls, and behind them the younger children crouched in groups,wrapping their starved arms in their pinafores.A little solace came at tea-time, in the shape of a double ration ofbread—a whole, instead of a half, slice—with the delicious addition ofa thin scrape of butter: it was the hebdomadal treat to which we alllooked forward from Sabbath to Sabbath. I generally contrived toreserve a moiety of this bounteous repast for myself; but the remainderI was invariably obliged to part with.The Sunday evening was spent in repeating, by heart, the ChurchCatechism, and the fifth, sixth, and seventh chapters of St. Matthew;and in listening to a long sermon, read by Miss Miller, whoseirrepressible yawns attested her weariness. A frequent interlude ofthese performances was the enactment of the part of Eutychus by somehalf-dozen of little girls, who, overpowered with sleep, would falldown, if not out of the third loft, yet off the fourth form, and betaken up half dead. The remedy was, to thrust them forward into thecentre of the schoolroom, and oblige them to stand there till thesermon was finished. Sometimes their feet failed them, and they sanktogether in a heap; they were then propped up with the monitors’ highstools.I have not yet alluded to the visits of Mr. Brocklehurst; and indeedthat gentleman was from home during the greater part of the first monthafter my arrival; perhaps prolonging his stay with his friend thearchdeacon: his absence was a relief to me. I need not say that I hadmy own reasons for dreading his coming: but come he did at last.One afternoon (I had then been three weeks at Lowood), as I was sittingwith a slate in my hand, puzzling over a sum in long division, my eyes,raised in abstraction to the window, caught sight of a figure justpassing: I recognised almost instinctively that gaunt outline; andwhen, two minutes after, all the school, teachers included, rose _enmasse_, it was not necessary for me to look up in order to ascertainwhose entrance they thus greeted. A long stride measured theschoolroom, and presently beside Miss Temple, who herself had risen,stood the same black column which had frowned on me so ominously fromthe hearthrug of Gateshead. I now glanced sideways at this piece ofarchitecture. Yes, I was right: it was Mr. Brocklehurst, buttoned up ina surtout, and looking longer, narrower, and more rigid than ever.I had my own reasons for being dismayed at this apparition; too well Iremembered the perfidious hints given by Mrs. Reed about mydisposition, &c.; the promise pledged by Mr. Brocklehurst to appriseMiss Temple and the teachers of my vicious nature. All along I had beendreading the fulfilment of this promise,—I had been looking out dailyfor the “Coming Man,” whose information respecting my past life andconversation was to brand me as a bad child for ever: now there he was.He stood at Miss Temple’s side; he was speaking low in her ear: I didnot doubt he was making disclosures of my villainy; and I watched hereye with painful anxiety, expecting every moment to see its dark orbturn on me a glance of repugnance and contempt. I listened too; and asI happened to be seated quite at the top of the room, I caught most ofwhat he said: its import relieved me from immediate apprehension.“I suppose, Miss Temple, the thread I bought at Lowton will do; itstruck me that it would be just of the quality for the calico chemises,and I sorted the needles to match. You may tell Miss Smith that Iforgot to make a memorandum of the darning needles, but she shall havesome papers sent in next week; and she is not, on any account, to giveout more than one at a time to each pupil: if they have more, they areapt to be careless and lose them. And, O ma’am! I wish the woollenstockings were better looked to!—when I was here last, I went into thekitchen-garden and examined the clothes drying on the line; there was aquantity of black hose in a very bad state of repair: from the size ofthe holes in them I was sure they had not been well mended from time totime.”He paused.“Your directions shall be attended to, sir,” said Miss Temple.“And, ma’am,” he continued, “the laundress tells me some of the girlshave two clean tuckers in the week: it is too much; the rules limitthem to one.”“I think I can explain that circumstance, sir. Agnes and CatherineJohnstone were invited to take tea with some friends at Lowton lastThursday, and I gave them leave to put on clean tuckers for theoccasion.”Mr. Brocklehurst nodded.“Well, for once it may pass; but please not to let the circumstanceoccur too often. And there is another thing which surprised me; I find,in settling accounts with the housekeeper, that a lunch, consisting ofbread and cheese, has twice been served out to the girls during thepast fortnight. How is this? I looked over the regulations, and I findno such meal as lunch mentioned. Who introduced this innovation? and bywhat authority?”“I must be responsible for the circumstance, sir,” replied Miss Temple:“the breakfast was so ill prepared that the pupils could not possiblyeat it; and I dared not allow them to remain fasting till dinner-time.”“Madam, allow me an instant. You are aware that my plan in bringing upthese girls is, not to accustom them to habits of luxury andindulgence, but to render them hardy, patient, self-denying. Should anylittle accidental disappointment of the appetite occur, such as thespoiling of a meal, the under or the over dressing of a dish, theincident ought not to be neutralised by replacing with something moredelicate the comfort lost, thus pampering the body and obviating theaim of this institution; it ought to be improved to the spiritualedification of the pupils, by encouraging them to evince fortitudeunder the temporary privation. A brief address on those occasions wouldnot be mistimed, wherein a judicious instructor would take theopportunity of referring to the sufferings of the primitive Christians;to the torments of martyrs; to the exhortations of our blessed LordHimself, calling upon His disciples to take up their cross and followHim; to His warnings that man shall not live by bread alone, but byevery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God; to His divineconsolations, ‘If ye suffer hunger or thirst for My sake, happy areye.’ Oh, madam, when you put bread and cheese, instead of burntporridge, into these children’s mouths, you may indeed feed their vilebodies, but you little think how you starve their immortal souls!”Mr. Brocklehurst again paused—perhaps overcome by his feelings. MissTemple had looked down when he first began to speak to her; but she nowgazed straight before her, and her face, naturally pale as marble,appeared to be assuming also the coldness and fixity of that material;especially her mouth, closed as if it would have required a sculptor’schisel to open it, and her brow settled gradually into petrifiedseverity.Meantime, Mr. Brocklehurst, standing on the hearth with his handsbehind his back, majestically surveyed the whole school. Suddenly hiseye gave a blink, as if it had met something that either dazzled orshocked its pupil; turning, he said in more rapid accents than he hadhitherto used—“Miss Temple, Miss Temple, what—_what_ is that girl with curled hair?Red hair, ma’am, curled—curled all over?” And extending his cane hepointed to the awful object, his hand shaking as he did so.“It is Julia Severn,” replied Miss Temple, very quietly.“Julia Severn, ma’am! And why has she, or any other, curled hair? Why,in defiance of every precept and principle of this house, does sheconform to the world so openly—here in an evangelical, charitableestablishment—as to wear her hair one mass of curls?”“Julia’s hair curls naturally,” returned Miss Temple, still morequietly.“Naturally! Yes, but we are not to conform to nature; I wish thesegirls to be the children of Grace: and why that abundance? I have againand again intimated that I desire the hair to be arranged closely,modestly, plainly. Miss Temple, that girl’s hair must be cut offentirely; I will send a barber to-morrow: and I see others who have fartoo much of the excrescence—that tall girl, tell her to turn round.Tell all the first form to rise up and direct their faces to the wall.”Miss Temple passed her handkerchief over her lips, as if to smooth awaythe involuntary smile that curled them; she gave the order, however,and when the first class could take in what was required of them, theyobeyed. Leaning a little back on my bench, I could see the looks andgrimaces with which they commented on this manoeuvre: it was a pity Mr.Brocklehurst could not see them too; he would perhaps have felt that,whatever he might do with the outside of the cup and platter, theinside was further beyond his interference than he imagined.He scrutinised the reverse of these living medals some five minutes,then pronounced sentence. These words fell like the knell of doom—“All those top-knots must be cut off.”Miss Temple seemed to remonstrate.“Madam,” he pursued, “I have a Master to serve whose kingdom is not ofthis world: my mission is to mortify in these girls the lusts of theflesh; to teach them to clothe themselves with shame-facedness andsobriety, not with braided hair and costly apparel; and each of theyoung persons before us has a string of hair twisted in plaits whichvanity itself might have woven; these, I repeat, must be cut off; thinkof the time wasted, of—”Mr. Brocklehurst was here interrupted: three other visitors, ladies,now entered the room. They ought to have come a little sooner to haveheard his lecture on dress, for they were splendidly attired in velvet,silk, and furs. The two younger of the trio (fine girls of sixteen andseventeen) had grey beaver hats, then in fashion, shaded with ostrichplumes, and from under the brim of this graceful head-dress fell aprofusion of light tresses, elaborately curled; the elder lady wasenveloped in a costly velvet shawl, trimmed with ermine, and she wore afalse front of French curls.These ladies were deferentially received by Miss Temple, as Mrs. andthe Misses Brocklehurst, and conducted to seats of honour at the top ofthe room. It seems they had come in the carriage with their reverendrelative, and had been conducting a rummaging scrutiny of the roomupstairs, while he transacted business with the housekeeper, questionedthe laundress, and lectured the superintendent. They now proceeded toaddress divers remarks and reproofs to Miss Smith, who was charged withthe care of the linen and the inspection of the dormitories: but I hadno time to listen to what they said; other matters called off andenchanted my attention.Hitherto, while gathering up the discourse of Mr. Brocklehurst and MissTemple, I had not, at the same time, neglected precautions to secure mypersonal safety; which I thought would be effected, if I could onlyelude observation. To this end, I had sat well back on the form, andwhile seeming to be busy with my sum, had held my slate in such amanner as to conceal my face: I might have escaped notice, had not mytreacherous slate somehow happened to slip from my hand, and fallingwith an obtrusive crash, directly drawn every eye upon me; I knew itwas all over now, and, as I stooped to pick up the two fragments ofslate, I rallied my forces for the worst. It came.“A careless girl!” said Mr. Brocklehurst, and immediately after—“It isthe new pupil, I perceive.” And before I could draw breath, “I must notforget I have a word to say respecting her.” Then aloud: how loud itseemed to me! “Let the child who broke her slate come forward!”Of my own accord I could not have stirred; I was paralysed: but the twogreat girls who sat on each side of me, set me on my legs and pushed metowards the dread judge, and then Miss Temple gently assisted me to hisvery feet, and I caught her whispered counsel—“Don’t be afraid, Jane, I saw it was an accident; you shall not bepunished.”The kind whisper went to my heart like a dagger.“Another minute, and she will despise me for a hypocrite,” thought I;and an impulse of fury against Reed, Brocklehurst, and Co. bounded inmy pulses at the conviction. I was no Helen Burns.“Fetch that stool,” said Mr. Brocklehurst, pointing to a very high onefrom which a monitor had just risen: it was brought.“Place the child upon it.”And I was placed there, by whom I don’t know: I was in no condition tonote particulars; I was only aware that they had hoisted me up to theheight of Mr. Brocklehurst’s nose, that he was within a yard of me, andthat a spread of shot orange and purple silk pelisses and a cloud ofsilvery plumage extended and waved below me.Mr. Brocklehurst hemmed.“Ladies,” said he, turning to his family, “Miss Temple, teachers, andchildren, you all see this girl?”Of course they did; for I felt their eyes directed like burning-glassesagainst my scorched skin.“You see she is yet young; you observe she possesses the ordinary formof childhood; God has graciously given her the shape that He has givento all of us; no signal deformity points her out as a marked character.Who would think that the Evil One had already found a servant and agentin her? Yet such, I grieve to say, is the case.”A pause—in which I began to steady the palsy of my nerves, and to feelthat the Rubicon was passed; and that the trial, no longer to beshirked, must be firmly sustained.“My dear children,” pursued the black marble clergyman, with pathos,“this is a sad, a melancholy occasion; for it becomes my duty to warnyou, that this girl, who might be one of God’s own lambs, is a littlecastaway: not a member of the true flock, but evidently an interloperand an alien. You must be on your guard against her; you must shun herexample; if necessary, avoid her company, exclude her from your sports,and shut her out from your converse. Teachers, you must watch her: keepyour eyes on her movements, weigh well her words, scrutinise heractions, punish her body to save her soul: if, indeed, such salvationbe possible, for (my tongue falters while I tell it) this girl, thischild, the native of a Christian land, worse than many a little heathenwho says its prayers to Brahma and kneels before Juggernaut—this girlis—a liar!”Now came a pause of ten minutes, during which I, by this time inperfect possession of my wits, observed all the female Brocklehurstsproduce their pocket-handkerchiefs and apply them to their optics,while the elderly lady swayed herself to and fro, and the two youngerones whispered, “How shocking!”Mr. Brocklehurst resumed.“This I learned from her benefactress; from the pious and charitablelady who adopted her in her orphan state, reared her as her owndaughter, and whose kindness, whose generosity the unhappy girl repaidby an ingratitude so bad, so dreadful, that at last her excellentpatroness was obliged to separate her from her own young ones, fearfullest her vicious example should contaminate their purity: she has senther here to be healed, even as the Jews of old sent their diseased tothe troubled pool of Bethesda; and, teachers, superintendent, I beg ofyou not to allow the waters to stagnate round her.”With this sublime conclusion, Mr. Brocklehurst adjusted the top buttonof his surtout, muttered something to his family, who rose, bowed toMiss Temple, and then all the great people sailed in state from theroom. Turning at the door, my judge said—“Let her stand half-an-hour longer on that stool, and let no one speakto her during the remainder of the day.”There was I, then, mounted aloft; I, who had said I could not bear theshame of standing on my natural feet in the middle of the room, was nowexposed to general view on a pedestal of infamy. What my sensationswere, no language can describe; but just as they all rose, stifling mybreath and constricting my throat, a girl came up and passed me: inpassing, she lifted her eyes. What a strange light inspired them! Whatan extraordinary sensation that ray sent through me! How the newfeeling bore me up! It was as if a martyr, a hero, had passed a slaveor victim, and imparted strength in the transit. I mastered the risinghysteria, lifted up my head, and took a firm stand on the stool. HelenBurns asked some slight question about her work of Miss Smith, waschidden for the triviality of the inquiry, returned to her place, andsmiled at me as she again went by. What a smile! I remember it now, andI know that it was the effluence of fine intellect, of true courage; itlit up her marked lineaments, her thin face, her sunken grey eye, likea reflection from the aspect of an angel. Yet at that moment HelenBurns wore on her arm “the untidy badge;” scarcely an hour ago I hadheard her condemned by Miss Scatcherd to a dinner of bread and water onthe morrow because she had blotted an exercise in copying it out. Suchis the imperfect nature of man! such spots are there on the disc of theclearest planet; and eyes like Miss Scatcherd’s can only see thoseminute defects, and are blind to the full brightness of the orb.CHAPTER VIIIEre the half-hour ended, five o’clock struck; school was dismissed, andall were gone into the refectory to tea. I now ventured to descend: itwas deep dusk; I retired into a corner and sat down on the floor. Thespell by which I had been so far supported began to dissolve; reactiontook place, and soon, so overwhelming was the grief that seized me, Isank prostrate with my face to the ground. Now I wept: Helen Burns wasnot here; nothing sustained me; left to myself I abandoned myself, andmy tears watered the boards. I had meant to be so good, and to do somuch at Lowood: to make so many friends, to earn respect and winaffection. Already I had made visible progress: that very morning I hadreached the head of my class; Miss Miller had praised me warmly; MissTemple had smiled approbation; she had promised to teach me drawing,and to let me learn French, if I continued to make similar improvementtwo months longer: and then I was well received by my fellow-pupils;treated as an equal by those of my own age, and not molested by any;now, here I lay again crushed and trodden on; and could I ever risemore?“Never,” I thought; and ardently I wished to die. While sobbing outthis wish in broken accents, some one approached: I started up—againHelen Burns was near me; the fading fires just showed her coming up thelong, vacant room; she brought my coffee and bread.“Come, eat something,” she said; but I put both away from me, feelingas if a drop or a crumb would have choked me in my present condition.Helen regarded me, probably with surprise: I could not now abate myagitation, though I tried hard; I continued to weep aloud. She sat downon the ground near me, embraced her knees with her arms, and rested herhead upon them; in that attitude she remained silent as an Indian. Iwas the first who spoke—“Helen, why do you stay with a girl whom everybody believes to be aliar?”“Everybody, Jane? Why, there are only eighty people who have heard youcalled so, and the world contains hundreds of millions.”“But what have I to do with millions? The eighty, I know, despise me.”“Jane, you are mistaken: probably not one in the school either despisesor dislikes you: many, I am sure, pity you much.”“How can they pity me after what Mr. Brocklehurst has said?”“Mr. Brocklehurst is not a god: nor is he even a great and admired man:he is little liked here; he never took steps to make himself liked. Hadhe treated you as an especial favourite, you would have found enemies,declared or covert, all around you; as it is, the greater number wouldoffer you sympathy if they dared. Teachers and pupils may look coldlyon you for a day or two, but friendly feelings are concealed in theirhearts; and if you persevere in doing well, these feelings will erelong appear so much the more evidently for their temporary suppression.Besides, Jane”—she paused.“Well, Helen?” said I, putting my hand into hers: she chafed my fingersgently to warm them, and went on—“If all the world hated you, and believed you wicked, while your ownconscience approved you, and absolved you from guilt, you would not bewithout friends.”“No; I know I should think well of myself; but that is not enough: ifothers don’t love me I would rather die than live—I cannot bear to besolitary and hated, Helen. Look here; to gain some real affection fromyou, or Miss Temple, or any other whom I truly love, I would willinglysubmit to have the bone of my arm broken, or to let a bull toss me, orto stand behind a kicking horse, and let it dash its hoof at my chest—”“Hush, Jane! you think too much of the love of human beings; you aretoo impulsive, too vehement; the sovereign hand that created yourframe, and put life into it, has provided you with other resources thanyour feeble self, or than creatures feeble as you. Besides this earth,and besides the race of men, there is an invisible world and a kingdomof spirits: that world is round us, for it is everywhere; and thosespirits watch us, for they are commissioned to guard us; and if we weredying in pain and shame, if scorn smote us on all sides, and hatredcrushed us, angels see our tortures, recognise our innocence (ifinnocent we be: as I know you are of this charge which Mr. Brocklehursthas weakly and pompously repeated at second-hand from Mrs. Reed; for Iread a sincere nature in your ardent eyes and on your clear front), andGod waits only the separation of spirit from flesh to crown us with afull reward. Why, then, should we ever sink overwhelmed with distress,when life is so soon over, and death is so certain an entrance tohappiness—to glory?”I was silent; Helen had calmed me; but in the tranquillity she impartedthere was an alloy of inexpressible sadness. I felt the impression ofwoe as she spoke, but I could not tell whence it came; and when, havingdone speaking, she breathed a little fast and coughed a short cough, Imomentarily forgot my own sorrows to yield to a vague concern for her.Resting my head on Helen’s shoulder, I put my arms round her waist; shedrew me to her, and we reposed in silence. We had not sat long thus,when another person came in. Some heavy clouds, swept from the sky by arising wind, had left the moon bare; and her light, streaming inthrough a window near, shone full both on us and on the approachingfigure, which we at once recognised as Miss Temple.“I came on purpose to find you, Jane Eyre,” said she; “I want you in myroom; and as Helen Burns is with you, she may come too.”We went; following the superintendent’s guidance, we had to thread someintricate passages, and mount a staircase before we reached herapartment; it contained a good fire, and looked cheerful. Miss Templetold Helen Burns to be seated in a low arm-chair on one side of thehearth, and herself taking another, she called me to her side.“Is it all over?” she asked, looking down at my face. “Have you criedyour grief away?”“I am afraid I never shall do that.”“Why?”“Because I have been wrongly accused; and you, ma’am, and everybodyelse, will now think me wicked.”“We shall think you what you prove yourself to be, my child. Continueto act as a good girl, and you will satisfy us.”“Shall I, Miss Temple?”“You will,” said she, passing her arm round me. “And now tell me who isthe lady whom Mr. Brocklehurst called your benefactress?”“Mrs. Reed, my uncle’s wife. My uncle is dead, and he left me to hercare.”“Did she not, then, adopt you of her own accord?”“No, ma’am; she was sorry to have to do it: but my uncle, as I haveoften heard the servants say, got her to promise before he died thatshe would always keep me.”“Well now, Jane, you know, or at least I will tell you, that when acriminal is accused, he is always allowed to speak in his own defence.You have been charged with falsehood; defend yourself to me as well asyou can. Say whatever your memory suggests is true; but add nothing andexaggerate nothing.”I resolved, in the depth of my heart, that I would be mostmoderate—most correct; and, having reflected a few minutes in order toarrange coherently what I had to say, I told her all the story of mysad childhood. Exhausted by emotion, my language was more subdued thanit generally was when it developed that sad theme; and mindful ofHelen’s warnings against the indulgence of resentment, I infused intothe narrative far less of gall and wormwood than ordinary. Thusrestrained and simplified, it sounded more credible: I felt as I wenton that Miss Temple fully believed me.In the course of the tale I had mentioned Mr. Lloyd as having come tosee me after the fit: for I never forgot the, to me, frightful episodeof the red-room: in detailing which, my excitement was sure, in somedegree, to break bounds; for nothing could soften in my recollectionthe spasm of agony which clutched my heart when Mrs. Reed spurned mywild supplication for pardon, and locked me a second time in the darkand haunted chamber.I had finished: Miss Temple regarded me a few minutes in silence; shethen said—“I know something of Mr. Lloyd; I shall write to him; if his replyagrees with your statement, you shall be publicly cleared from everyimputation; to me, Jane, you are clear now.”She kissed me, and still keeping me at her side (where I was wellcontented to stand, for I derived a child’s pleasure from thecontemplation of her face, her dress, her one or two ornaments, herwhite forehead, her clustered and shining curls, and beaming darkeyes), she proceeded to address Helen Burns.“How are you to-night, Helen? Have you coughed much to-day?”“Not quite so much, I think, ma’am.”“And the pain in your chest?”“It is a little better.”Miss Temple got up, took her hand and examined her pulse; then shereturned to her own seat: as she resumed it, I heard her sigh low. Shewas pensive a few minutes, then rousing herself, she said cheerfully—“But you two are my visitors to-night; I must treat you as such.” Sherang her bell.“Barbara,” she said to the servant who answered it, “I have not yet hadtea; bring the tray and place cups for these two young ladies.”And a tray was soon brought. How pretty, to my eyes, did the china cupsand bright teapot look, placed on the little round table near the fire!How fragrant was the steam of the beverage, and the scent of the toast!of which, however, I, to my dismay (for I was beginning to be hungry)discerned only a very small portion: Miss Temple discerned it too.“Barbara,” said she, “can you not bring a little more bread and butter?There is not enough for three.”Barbara went out: she returned soon—“Madam, Mrs. Harden says she has sent up the usual quantity.”Mrs. Harden, be it observed, was the housekeeper: a woman after Mr.Brocklehurst’s own heart, made up of equal parts of whalebone and iron.“Oh, very well!” returned Miss Temple; “we must make it do, Barbara, Isuppose.” And as the girl withdrew she added, smiling, “Fortunately, Ihave it in my power to supply deficiencies for this once.”Having invited Helen and me to approach the table, and placed beforeeach of us a cup of tea with one delicious but thin morsel of toast,she got up, unlocked a drawer, and taking from it a parcel wrapped inpaper, disclosed presently to our eyes a good-sized seed-cake.“I meant to give each of you some of this to take with you,” said she,“but as there is so little toast, you must have it now,” and sheproceeded to cut slices with a generous hand.We feasted that evening as on nectar and ambrosia; and not the leastdelight of the entertainment was the smile of gratification with whichour hostess regarded us, as we satisfied our famished appetites on thedelicate fare she liberally supplied.Tea over and the tray removed, she again summoned us to the fire; wesat one on each side of her, and now a conversation followed betweenher and Helen, which it was indeed a privilege to be admitted to hear.Miss Temple had always something of serenity in her air, of state inher mien, of refined propriety in her language, which precludeddeviation into the ardent, the excited, the eager: something whichchastened the pleasure of those who looked on her and listened to her,by a controlling sense of awe; and such was my feeling now: but as toHelen Burns, I was struck with wonder.The refreshing meal, the brilliant fire, the presence and kindness ofher beloved instructress, or, perhaps, more than all these, somethingin her own unique mind, had roused her powers within her. They woke,they kindled: first, they glowed in the bright tint of her cheek, whichtill this hour I had never seen but pale and bloodless; then they shonein the liquid lustre of her eyes, which had suddenly acquired a beautymore singular than that of Miss Temple’s—a beauty neither of finecolour nor long eyelash, nor pencilled brow, but of meaning, ofmovement, of radiance. Then her soul sat on her lips, and languageflowed, from what source I cannot tell. Has a girl of fourteen a heartlarge enough, vigorous enough, to hold the swelling spring of pure,full, fervid eloquence? Such was the characteristic of Helen’sdiscourse on that, to me, memorable evening; her spirit seemedhastening to live within a very brief span as much as many live duringa protracted existence.They conversed of things I had never heard of; of nations and timespast; of countries far away; of secrets of nature discovered or guessedat: they spoke of books: how many they had read! What stores ofknowledge they possessed! Then they seemed so familiar with Frenchnames and French authors: but my amazement reached its climax when MissTemple asked Helen if she sometimes snatched a moment to recall theLatin her father had taught her, and taking a book from a shelf, badeher read and construe a page of Virgil; and Helen obeyed, my organ ofveneration expanding at every sounding line. She had scarcely finishedere the bell announced bedtime! no delay could be admitted; Miss Templeembraced us both, saying, as she drew us to her heart—“God bless you, my children!”Helen she held a little longer than me: she let her go morereluctantly; it was Helen her eye followed to the door; it was for hershe a second time breathed a sad sigh; for her she wiped a tear fromher cheek.On reaching the bedroom, we heard the voice of Miss Scatcherd: she wasexamining drawers; she had just pulled out Helen Burns’s, and when weentered Helen was greeted with a sharp reprimand, and told thatto-morrow she should have half-a-dozen of untidily folded articlespinned to her shoulder.“My things were indeed in shameful disorder,” murmured Helen to me, ina low voice: “I intended to have arranged them, but I forgot.”Next morning, Miss Scatcherd wrote in conspicuous characters on a pieceof pasteboard the word “Slattern,” and bound it like a phylactery roundHelen’s large, mild, intelligent, and benign-looking forehead. She woreit till evening, patient, unresentful, regarding it as a deservedpunishment. The moment Miss Scatcherd withdrew after afternoon school,I ran to Helen, tore it off, and thrust it into the fire: the fury ofwhich she was incapable had been burning in my soul all day, and tears,hot and large, had continually been scalding my cheek; for thespectacle of her sad resignation gave me an intolerable pain at theheart.About a week subsequently to the incidents above narrated, Miss Temple,who had written to Mr. Lloyd, received his answer: it appeared thatwhat he said went to corroborate my account. Miss Temple, havingassembled the whole school, announced that inquiry had been made intothe charges alleged against Jane Eyre, and that she was most happy tobe able to pronounce her completely cleared from every imputation. Theteachers then shook hands with me and kissed me, and a murmur ofpleasure ran through the ranks of my companions.Thus relieved of a grievous load, I from that hour set to work afresh,resolved to pioneer my way through every difficulty: I toiled hard, andmy success was proportionate to my efforts; my memory, not naturallytenacious, improved with practice; exercise sharpened my wits; in a fewweeks I was promoted to a higher class; in less than two months I wasallowed to commence French and drawing. I learned the first two tensesof the verb _Etre_, and sketched my first cottage (whose walls,by-the-bye, outrivalled in slope those of the leaning tower of Pisa),on the same day. That night, on going to bed, I forgot to prepare inimagination the Barmecide supper of hot roast potatoes, or white breadand new milk, with which I was wont to amuse my inward cravings: Ifeasted instead on the spectacle of ideal drawings, which I saw in thedark; all the work of my own hands: freely pencilled houses and trees,picturesque rocks and ruins, Cuyp-like groups of cattle, sweetpaintings of butterflies hovering over unblown roses, of birds pickingat ripe cherries, of wren’s nests enclosing pearl-like eggs, wreathedabout with young ivy sprays. I examined, too, in thought, thepossibility of my ever being able to translate currently a certainlittle French story which Madame Pierrot had that day shown me; nor wasthat problem solved to my satisfaction ere I fell sweetly asleep.Well has Solomon said—“Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, thana stalled ox and hatred therewith.”I would not now have exchanged Lowood with all its privations forGateshead and its daily luxuries.CHAPTER IXBut the privations, or rather the hardships, of Lowood lessened. Springdrew on: she was indeed already come; the frosts of winter had ceased;its snows were melted, its cutting winds ameliorated. My wretched feet,flayed and swollen to lameness by the sharp air of January, began toheal and subside under the gentler breathings of April; the nights andmornings no longer by their Canadian temperature froze the very bloodin our veins; we could now endure the play-hour passed in the garden:sometimes on a sunny day it began even to be pleasant and genial, and agreenness grew over those brown beds, which, freshening daily,suggested the thought that Hope traversed them at night, and left eachmorning brighter traces of her steps. Flowers peeped out amongst theleaves; snow-drops, crocuses, purple auriculas, and golden-eyedpansies. On Thursday afternoons (half-holidays) we now took walks, andfound still sweeter flowers opening by the wayside, under the hedges.I discovered, too, that a great pleasure, an enjoyment which thehorizon only bounded, lay all outside the high and spike-guarded wallsof our garden: this pleasure consisted in prospect of noble summitsgirdling a great hill-hollow, rich in verdure and shadow; in a brightbeck, full of dark stones and sparkling eddies. How different had thisscene looked when I viewed it laid out beneath the iron sky of winter,stiffened in frost, shrouded with snow!—when mists as chill as deathwandered to the impulse of east winds along those purple peaks, androlled down “ing” and holm till they blended with the frozen fog of thebeck! That beck itself was then a torrent, turbid and curbless: it toreasunder the wood, and sent a raving sound through the air, oftenthickened with wild rain or whirling sleet; and for the forest on itsbanks, _that_ showed only ranks of skeletons.April advanced to May: a bright serene May it was; days of blue sky,placid sunshine, and soft western or southern gales filled up itsduration. And now vegetation matured with vigour; Lowood shook looseits tresses; it became all green, all flowery; its great elm, ash, andoak skeletons were restored to majestic life; woodland plants sprang upprofusely in its recesses; unnumbered varieties of moss filled itshollows, and it made a strange ground-sunshine out of the wealth of itswild primrose plants: I have seen their pale gold gleam in overshadowedspots like scatterings of the sweetest lustre. All this I enjoyed oftenand fully, free, unwatched, and almost alone: for this unwonted libertyand pleasure there was a cause, to which it now becomes my task toadvert.Have I not described a pleasant site for a dwelling, when I speak of itas bosomed in hill and wood, and rising from the verge of a stream?Assuredly, pleasant enough: but whether healthy or not is anotherquestion.That forest-dell, where Lowood lay, was the cradle of fog and fog-bredpestilence; which, quickening with the quickening spring, crept intothe Orphan Asylum, breathed typhus through its crowded schoolroom anddormitory, and, ere May arrived, transformed the seminary into anhospital.Semi-starvation and neglected colds had predisposed most of the pupilsto receive infection: forty-five out of the eighty girls lay ill at onetime. Classes were broken up, rules relaxed. The few who continued wellwere allowed almost unlimited license; because the medical attendantinsisted on the necessity of frequent exercise to keep them in health:and had it been otherwise, no one had leisure to watch or restrainthem. Miss Temple’s whole attention was absorbed by the patients: shelived in the sick-room, never quitting it except to snatch a few hours’rest at night. The teachers were fully occupied with packing up andmaking other necessary preparations for the departure of those girlswho were fortunate enough to have friends and relations able andwilling to remove them from the seat of contagion. Many, alreadysmitten, went home only to die: some died at the school, and wereburied quietly and quickly, the nature of the malady forbidding delay.While disease had thus become an inhabitant of Lowood, and death itsfrequent visitor; while there was gloom and fear within its walls;while its rooms and passages steamed with hospital smells, the drug andthe pastille striving vainly to overcome the effluvia of mortality,that bright May shone unclouded over the bold hills and beautifulwoodland out of doors. Its garden, too, glowed with flowers: hollyhockshad sprung up tall as trees, lilies had opened, tulips and roses werein bloom; the borders of the little beds were gay with pink thrift andcrimson double daisies; the sweetbriars gave out, morning and evening,their scent of spice and apples; and these fragrant treasures were alluseless for most of the inmates of Lowood, except to furnish now andthen a handful of herbs and blossoms to put in a coffin.But I, and the rest who continued well, enjoyed fully the beauties ofthe scene and season; they let us ramble in the wood, like gipsies,from morning till night; we did what we liked, went where we liked: welived better too. Mr. Brocklehurst and his family never came nearLowood now: household matters were not scrutinised into; the crosshousekeeper was gone, driven away by the fear of infection; hersuccessor, who had been matron at the Lowton Dispensary, unused to theways of her new abode, provided with comparative liberality. Besides,there were fewer to feed; the sick could eat little; ourbreakfast-basins were better filled; when there was no time to preparea regular dinner, which often happened, she would give us a large pieceof cold pie, or a thick slice of bread and cheese, and this we carriedaway with us to the wood, where we each chose the spot we liked best,and dined sumptuously.My favourite seat was a smooth and broad stone, rising white and dryfrom the very middle of the beck, and only to be got at by wadingthrough the water; a feat I accomplished barefoot. The stone was justbroad enough to accommodate, comfortably, another girl and me, at thattime my chosen comrade—one Mary Ann Wilson; a shrewd, observantpersonage, whose society I took pleasure in, partly because she waswitty and original, and partly because she had a manner which set me atmy ease. Some years older than I, she knew more of the world, and couldtell me many things I liked to hear: with her my curiosity foundgratification: to my faults also she gave ample indulgence, neverimposing curb or rein on anything I said. She had a turn for narrative,I for analysis; she liked to inform, I to question; so we got onswimmingly together, deriving much entertainment, if not muchimprovement, from our mutual intercourse.And where, meantime, was Helen Burns? Why did I not spend these sweetdays of liberty with her? Had I forgotten her? or was I so worthless asto have grown tired of her pure society? Surely the Mary Ann Wilson Ihave mentioned was inferior to my first acquaintance: she could onlytell me amusing stories, and reciprocate any racy and pungent gossip Ichose to indulge in; while, if I have spoken truth of Helen, she wasqualified to give those who enjoyed the privilege of her converse ataste of far higher things.True, reader; and I knew and felt this: and though I am a defectivebeing, with many faults and few redeeming points, yet I never tired ofHelen Burns; nor ever ceased to cherish for her a sentiment ofattachment, as strong, tender, and respectful as any that ever animatedmy heart. How could it be otherwise, when Helen, at all times and underall circumstances, evinced for me a quiet and faithful friendship,which ill-humour never soured, nor irritation never troubled? But Helenwas ill at present: for some weeks she had been removed from my sightto I knew not what room upstairs. She was not, I was told, in thehospital portion of the house with the fever patients; for hercomplaint was consumption, not typhus: and by consumption I, in myignorance, understood something mild, which time and care would be sureto alleviate.I was confirmed in this idea by the fact of her once or twice comingdownstairs on very warm sunny afternoons, and being taken by MissTemple into the garden; but, on these occasions, I was not allowed togo and speak to her; I only saw her from the schoolroom window, andthen not distinctly; for she was much wrapped up, and sat at a distanceunder the verandah.One evening, in the beginning of June, I had stayed out very late withMary Ann in the wood; we had, as usual, separated ourselves from theothers, and had wandered far; so far that we lost our way, and had toask it at a lonely cottage, where a man and woman lived, who lookedafter a herd of half-wild swine that fed on the mast in the wood. Whenwe got back, it was after moonrise: a pony, which we knew to be thesurgeon’s, was standing at the garden door. Mary Ann remarked that shesupposed some one must be very ill, as Mr. Bates had been sent for atthat time of the evening. She went into the house; I stayed behind afew minutes to plant in my garden a handful of roots I had dug up inthe forest, and which I feared would wither if I left them till themorning. This done, I lingered yet a little longer: the flowers smeltso sweet as the dew fell; it was such a pleasant evening, so serene, sowarm; the still glowing west promised so fairly another fine day on themorrow; the moon rose with such majesty in the grave east. I was notingthese things and enjoying them as a child might, when it entered mymind as it had never done before:—“How sad to be lying now on a sick bed, and to be in danger of dying!This world is pleasant—it would be dreary to be called from it, and tohave to go who knows where?”And then my mind made its first earnest effort to comprehend what hadbeen infused into it concerning heaven and hell; and for the first timeit recoiled, baffled; and for the first time glancing behind, on eachside, and before it, it saw all round an unfathomed gulf: it felt theone point where it stood—the present; all the rest was formless cloudand vacant depth; and it shuddered at the thought of tottering, andplunging amid that chaos. While pondering this new idea, I heard thefront door open; Mr. Bates came out, and with him was a nurse. Aftershe had seen him mount his horse and depart, she was about to close thedoor, but I ran up to her.“How is Helen Burns?”“Very poorly,” was the answer.“Is it her Mr. Bates has been to see?”“Yes.”“And what does he say about her?”“He says she’ll not be here long.”This phrase, uttered in my hearing yesterday, would have only conveyedthe notion that she was about to be removed to Northumberland, to herown home. I should not have suspected that it meant she was dying; butI knew instantly now! It opened clear on my comprehension that HelenBurns was numbering her last days in this world, and that she was goingto be taken to the region of spirits, if such region there were. Iexperienced a shock of horror, then a strong thrill of grief, then adesire—a necessity to see her; and I asked in what room she lay.“She is in Miss Temple’s room,” said the nurse.“May I go up and speak to her?”“Oh no, child! It is not likely; and now it is time for you to come in;you’ll catch the fever if you stop out when the dew is falling.”The nurse closed the front door; I went in by the side entrance whichled to the schoolroom: I was just in time; it was nine o’clock, andMiss Miller was calling the pupils to go to bed.It might be two hours later, probably near eleven, when I—not havingbeen able to fall asleep, and deeming, from the perfect silence of thedormitory, that my companions were all wrapt in profound repose—rosesoftly, put on my frock over my night-dress, and, without shoes, creptfrom the apartment, and set off in quest of Miss Temple’s room. It wasquite at the other end of the house; but I knew my way; and the lightof the unclouded summer moon, entering here and there at passagewindows, enabled me to find it without difficulty. An odour of camphorand burnt vinegar warned me when I came near the fever room: and Ipassed its door quickly, fearful lest the nurse who sat up all nightshould hear me. I dreaded being discovered and sent back; for I _must_see Helen,—I must embrace her before she died,—I must give her one lastkiss, exchange with her one last word.Having descended a staircase, traversed a portion of the house below,and succeeded in opening and shutting, without noise, two doors, Ireached another flight of steps; these I mounted, and then justopposite to me was Miss Temple’s room. A light shone through thekeyhole and from under the door; a profound stillness pervaded thevicinity. Coming near, I found the door slightly ajar; probably toadmit some fresh air into the close abode of sickness. Indisposed tohesitate, and full of impatient impulses—soul and senses quivering withkeen throes—I put it back and looked in. My eye sought Helen, andfeared to find death.Close by Miss Temple’s bed, and half covered with its white curtains,there stood a little crib. I saw the outline of a form under theclothes, but the face was hid by the hangings: the nurse I had spokento in the garden sat in an easy-chair asleep; an unsnuffed candle burntdimly on the table. Miss Temple was not to be seen: I knew afterwardsthat she had been called to a delirious patient in the fever-room. Iadvanced; then paused by the crib side: my hand was on the curtain, butI preferred speaking before I withdrew it. I still recoiled at thedread of seeing a corpse.“Helen!” I whispered softly, “are you awake?”She stirred herself, put back the curtain, and I saw her face, pale,wasted, but quite composed: she looked so little changed that my fearwas instantly dissipated.“Can it be you, Jane?” she asked, in her own gentle voice.“Oh!” I thought, “she is not going to die; they are mistaken: she couldnot speak and look so calmly if she were.”I got on to her crib and kissed her: her forehead was cold, and hercheek both cold and thin, and so were her hand and wrist; but shesmiled as of old.“Why are you come here, Jane? It is past eleven o’clock: I heard itstrike some minutes since.”“I came to see you, Helen: I heard you were very ill, and I could notsleep till I had spoken to you.”“You came to bid me good-bye, then: you are just in time probably.”“Are you going somewhere, Helen? Are you going home?”“Yes; to my long home—my last home.”“No, no, Helen!” I stopped, distressed. While I tried to devour mytears, a fit of coughing seized Helen; it did not, however, wake thenurse; when it was over, she lay some minutes exhausted; then shewhispered—“Jane, your little feet are bare; lie down and cover yourself with myquilt.”I did so: she put her arm over me, and I nestled close to her. After along silence, she resumed, still whispering—“I am very happy, Jane; and when you hear that I am dead, you must besure and not grieve: there is nothing to grieve about. We all must dieone day, and the illness which is removing me is not painful; it isgentle and gradual: my mind is at rest. I leave no one to regret memuch: I have only a father; and he is lately married, and will not missme. By dying young, I shall escape great sufferings. I had notqualities or talents to make my way very well in the world: I shouldhave been continually at fault.”“But where are you going to, Helen? Can you see? Do you know?”“I believe; I have faith: I am going to God.”“Where is God? What is God?”“My Maker and yours, who will never destroy what He created. I relyimplicitly on His power, and confide wholly in His goodness: I countthe hours till that eventful one arrives which shall restore me to Him,reveal Him to me.”“You are sure, then, Helen, that there is such a place as heaven, andthat our souls can get to it when we die?”“I am sure there is a future state; I believe God is good; I can resignmy immortal part to Him without any misgiving. God is my father; God ismy friend: I love Him; I believe He loves me.”“And shall I see you again, Helen, when I die?”“You will come to the same region of happiness: be received by the samemighty, universal Parent, no doubt, dear Jane.”Again I questioned, but this time only in thought. “Where is thatregion? Does it exist?” And I clasped my arms closer round Helen; sheseemed dearer to me than ever; I felt as if I could not let her go; Ilay with my face hidden on her neck. Presently she said, in thesweetest tone—“How comfortable I am! That last fit of coughing has tired me a little;I feel as if I could sleep: but don’t leave me, Jane; I like to haveyou near me.”“I’ll stay with you, _dear_ Helen: no one shall take me away.”“Are you warm, darling?”“Yes.”“Good-night, Jane.”“Good-night, Helen.”She kissed me, and I her, and we both soon slumbered.When I awoke it was day: an unusual movement roused me; I looked up; Iwas in somebody’s arms; the nurse held me; she was carrying me throughthe passage back to the dormitory. I was not reprimanded for leaving mybed; people had something else to think about; no explanation wasafforded then to my many questions; but a day or two afterwards Ilearned that Miss Temple, on returning to her own room at dawn, hadfound me laid in the little crib; my face against Helen Burns’sshoulder, my arms round her neck. I was asleep, and Helen was—dead.Her grave is in Brocklebridge churchyard: for fifteen years after herdeath it was only covered by a grassy mound; but now a grey marbletablet marks the spot, inscribed with her name, and the word“Resurgam.”CHAPTER XHitherto I have recorded in detail the events of my insignificantexistence: to the first ten years of my life I have given almost asmany chapters. But this is not to be a regular autobiography: I am onlybound to invoke Memory where I know her responses will possess somedegree of interest; therefore I now pass a space of eight years almostin silence: a few lines only are necessary to keep up the links ofconnection.When the typhus fever had fulfilled its mission of devastation atLowood, it gradually disappeared from thence; but not till itsvirulence and the number of its victims had drawn public attention onthe school. Inquiry was made into the origin of the scourge, and bydegrees various facts came out which excited public indignation in ahigh degree. The unhealthy nature of the site; the quantity and qualityof the children’s food; the brackish, fetid water used in itspreparation; the pupils’ wretched clothing and accommodations—all thesethings were discovered, and the discovery produced a result mortifyingto Mr. Brocklehurst, but beneficial to the institution.Several wealthy and benevolent individuals in the county subscribedlargely for the erection of a more convenient building in a bettersituation; new regulations were made; improvements in diet and clothingintroduced; the funds of the school were intrusted to the management ofa committee. Mr. Brocklehurst, who, from his wealth and familyconnections, could not be overlooked, still retained the post oftreasurer; but he was aided in the discharge of his duties by gentlemenof rather more enlarged and sympathising minds: his office ofinspector, too, was shared by those who knew how to combine reason withstrictness, comfort with economy, compassion with uprightness. Theschool, thus improved, became in time a truly useful and nobleinstitution. I remained an inmate of its walls, after its regeneration,for eight years: six as pupil, and two as teacher; and in bothcapacities I bear my testimony to its value and importance.During these eight years my life was uniform: but not unhappy, becauseit was not inactive. I had the means of an excellent education placedwithin my reach; a fondness for some of my studies, and a desire toexcel in all, together with a great delight in pleasing my teachers,especially such as I loved, urged me on: I availed myself fully of theadvantages offered me. In time I rose to be the first girl of the firstclass; then I was invested with the office of teacher; which Idischarged with zeal for two years: but at the end of that time Ialtered.Miss Temple, through all changes, had thus far continued superintendentof the seminary: to her instruction I owed the best part of myacquirements; her friendship and society had been my continual solace;she had stood me in the stead of mother, governess, and, latterly,companion. At this period she married, removed with her husband (aclergyman, an excellent man, almost worthy of such a wife) to a distantcounty, and consequently was lost to me.From the day she left I was no longer the same: with her was gone everysettled feeling, every association that had made Lowood in some degreea home to me. I had imbibed from her something of her nature and muchof her habits: more harmonious thoughts: what seemed better regulatedfeelings had become the inmates of my mind. I had given in allegianceto duty and order; I was quiet; I believed I was content: to the eyesof others, usually even to my own, I appeared a disciplined and subduedcharacter.But destiny, in the shape of the Rev. Mr. Nasmyth, came between me andMiss Temple: I saw her in her travelling dress step into a post-chaise,shortly after the marriage ceremony; I watched the chaise mount thehill and disappear beyond its brow; and then retired to my own room,and there spent in solitude the greatest part of the half-holidaygranted in honour of the occasion.I walked about the chamber most of the time. I imagined myself only tobe regretting my loss, and thinking how to repair it; but when myreflections were concluded, and I looked up and found that theafternoon was gone, and evening far advanced, another discovery dawnedon me, namely, that in the interval I had undergone a transformingprocess; that my mind had put off all it had borrowed of Miss Temple—orrather that she had taken with her the serene atmosphere I had beenbreathing in her vicinity—and that now I was left in my naturalelement, and beginning to feel the stirring of old emotions. It did notseem as if a prop were withdrawn, but rather as if a motive were gone:it was not the power to be tranquil which had failed me, but the reasonfor tranquillity was no more. My world had for some years been inLowood: my experience had been of its rules and systems; now Iremembered that the real world was wide, and that a varied field ofhopes and fears, of sensations and excitements, awaited those who hadcourage to go forth into its expanse, to seek real knowledge of lifeamidst its perils.I went to my window, opened it, and looked out. There were the twowings of the building; there was the garden; there were the skirts ofLowood; there was the hilly horizon. My eye passed all other objects torest on those most remote, the blue peaks; it was those I longed tosurmount; all within their boundary of rock and heath seemedprison-ground, exile limits. I traced the white road winding round thebase of one mountain, and vanishing in a gorge between two; how Ilonged to follow it farther! I recalled the time when I had travelledthat very road in a coach; I remembered descending that hill attwilight; an age seemed to have elapsed since the day which brought mefirst to Lowood, and I had never quitted it since. My vacations had allbeen spent at school: Mrs. Reed had never sent for me to Gateshead;neither she nor any of her family had ever been to visit me. I had hadno communication by letter or message with the outer world:school-rules, school-duties, school-habits and notions, and voices, andfaces, and phrases, and costumes, and preferences, and antipathies—suchwas what I knew of existence. And now I felt that it was not enough; Itired of the routine of eight years in one afternoon. I desiredliberty; for liberty I gasped; for liberty I uttered a prayer; itseemed scattered on the wind then faintly blowing. I abandoned it andframed a humbler supplication; for change, stimulus: that petition,too, seemed swept off into vague space: “Then,” I cried, halfdesperate, “grant me at least a new servitude!”Here a bell, ringing the hour of supper, called me downstairs.I was not free to resume the interrupted chain of my reflections tillbedtime: even then a teacher who occupied the same room with me kept mefrom the subject to which I longed to recur, by a prolonged effusion ofsmall talk. How I wished sleep would silence her. It seemed as if,could I but go back to the idea which had last entered my mind as Istood at the window, some inventive suggestion would rise for myrelief.Miss Gryce snored at last; she was a heavy Welshwoman, and till now herhabitual nasal strains had never been regarded by me in any other lightthan as a nuisance; to-night I hailed the first deep notes withsatisfaction; I was debarrassed of interruption; my half-effacedthought instantly revived.“A new servitude! There is something in that,” I soliloquised(mentally, be it understood; I did not talk aloud), “I know there is,because it does not sound too sweet; it is not like such words asLiberty, Excitement, Enjoyment: delightful sounds truly; but no morethan sounds for me; and so hollow and fleeting that it is mere waste oftime to listen to them. But Servitude! That must be matter of fact. Anyone may serve: I have served here eight years; now all I want is toserve elsewhere. Can I not get so much of my own will? Is not the thingfeasible? Yes—yes—the end is not so difficult; if I had only a brainactive enough to ferret out the means of attaining it.”I sat up in bed by way of arousing this said brain: it was a chillynight; I covered my shoulders with a shawl, and then I proceeded _tothink_ again with all my might.“What do I want? A new place, in a new house, amongst new faces, undernew circumstances: I want this because it is of no use wanting anythingbetter. How do people do to get a new place? They apply to friends, Isuppose: I have no friends. There are many others who have no friends,who must look about for themselves and be their own helpers; and whatis their resource?”I could not tell: nothing answered me; I then ordered my brain to finda response, and quickly. It worked and worked faster: I felt the pulsesthrob in my head and temples; but for nearly an hour it worked inchaos; and no result came of its efforts. Feverish with vain labour, Igot up and took a turn in the room; undrew the curtain, noted a star ortwo, shivered with cold, and again crept to bed.A kind fairy, in my absence, had surely dropped the required suggestionon my pillow; for as I lay down, it came quietly and naturally to mymind:—“Those who want situations advertise; you must advertise in the_——shire Herald_.”“How? I know nothing about advertising.”Replies rose smooth and prompt now:—“You must enclose the advertisement and the money to pay for it under acover directed to the editor of the _Herald_; you must put it, thefirst opportunity you have, into the post at Lowton; answers must beaddressed to J.E., at the post-office there; you can go and inquire inabout a week after you send your letter, if any are come, and actaccordingly.”This scheme I went over twice, thrice; it was then digested in my mind;I had it in a clear practical form: I felt satisfied, and fell asleep.With earliest day, I was up: I had my advertisement written, enclosed,and directed before the bell rang to rouse the school; it ran thus:—“A young lady accustomed to tuition” (had I not been a teacher twoyears?) “is desirous of meeting with a situation in a private familywhere the children are under fourteen” (I thought that as I was barelyeighteen, it would not do to undertake the guidance of pupils nearer myown age). “She is qualified to teach the usual branches of a goodEnglish education, together with French, Drawing, and Music” (in thosedays, reader, this now narrow catalogue of accomplishments, would havebeen held tolerably comprehensive). “Address, J.E., Post-office,Lowton, ——shire.”This document remained locked in my drawer all day: after tea, I askedleave of the new superintendent to go to Lowton, in order to performsome small commissions for myself and one or two of my fellow-teachers;permission was readily granted; I went. It was a walk of two miles, andthe evening was wet, but the days were still long; I visited a shop ortwo, slipped the letter into the post-office, and came back throughheavy rain, with streaming garments, but with a relieved heart.The succeeding week seemed long: it came to an end at last, however,like all sublunary things, and once more, towards the close of apleasant autumn day, I found myself afoot on the road to Lowton. Apicturesque track it was, by the way; lying along the side of the beckand through the sweetest curves of the dale: but that day I thoughtmore of the letters, that might or might not be awaiting me at thelittle burgh whither I was bound, than of the charms of lea and water.My ostensible errand on this occasion was to get measured for a pair ofshoes; so I discharged that business first, and when it was done, Istepped across the clean and quiet little street from the shoemaker’sto the post-office: it was kept by an old dame, who wore hornspectacles on her nose, and black mittens on her hands.“Are there any letters for J.E.?” I asked.She peered at me over her spectacles, and then she opened a drawer andfumbled among its contents for a long time, so long that my hopes beganto falter. At last, having held a document before her glasses fornearly five minutes, she presented it across the counter, accompanyingthe act by another inquisitive and mistrustful glance—it was for J.E.“Is there only one?” I demanded.“There are no more,” said she; and I put it in my pocket and turned myface homeward: I could not open it then; rules obliged me to be back byeight, and it was already half-past seven.Various duties awaited me on my arrival: I had to sit with the girlsduring their hour of study; then it was my turn to read prayers; to seethem to bed: afterwards I supped with the other teachers. Even when wefinally retired for the night, the inevitable Miss Gryce was still mycompanion: we had only a short end of candle in our candlestick, and Idreaded lest she should talk till it was all burnt out; fortunately,however, the heavy supper she had eaten produced a soporific effect:she was already snoring before I had finished undressing. There stillremained an inch of candle: I now took out my letter; the seal was aninitial F.; I broke it; the contents were brief.“If J.E., who advertised in the _——shire Herald_ of last Thursday,possesses the acquirements mentioned, and if she is in a position togive satisfactory references as to character and competency, asituation can be offered her where there is but one pupil, a littlegirl, under ten years of age; and where the salary is thirty pounds perannum. J.E. is requested to send references, name, address, and allparticulars to the direction:—“Mrs. Fairfax, Thornfield, near Millcote, ——shire.”I examined the document long: the writing was old-fashioned and ratheruncertain, like that of an elderly lady. This circumstance wassatisfactory: a private fear had haunted me, that in thus acting formyself, and by my own guidance, I ran the risk of getting into somescrape; and, above all things, I wished the result of my endeavours tobe respectable, proper, _en règle_. I now felt that an elderly lady wasno bad ingredient in the business I had on hand. Mrs. Fairfax! I sawher in a black gown and widow’s cap; frigid, perhaps, but not uncivil:a model of elderly English respectability. Thornfield! that, doubtless,was the name of her house: a neat orderly spot, I was sure; though Ifailed in my efforts to conceive a correct plan of the premises.Millcote, ——shire; I brushed up my recollections of the map of England;yes, I saw it; both the shire and the town. ——shire was seventy milesnearer London than the remote county where I now resided: that was arecommendation to me. I longed to go where there was life and movement:Millcote was a large manufacturing town on the banks of the A——: a busyplace enough, doubtless: so much the better; it would be a completechange at least. Not that my fancy was much captivated by the idea oflong chimneys and clouds of smoke—“but,” I argued, “Thornfield will,probably, be a good way from the town.”Here the socket of the candle dropped, and the wick went out.Next day new steps were to be taken; my plans could no longer beconfined to my own breast; I must impart them in order to achieve theirsuccess. Having sought and obtained an audience of the superintendentduring the noontide recreation, I told her I had a prospect of gettinga new situation where the salary would be double what I now received(for at Lowood I only got £15 per annum); and requested she would breakthe matter for me to Mr. Brocklehurst, or some of the committee, andascertain whether they would permit me to mention them as references.She obligingly consented to act as mediatrix in the matter. The nextday she laid the affair before Mr. Brocklehurst, who said that Mrs.Reed must be written to, as she was my natural guardian. A note wasaccordingly addressed to that lady, who returned for answer, that “Imight do as I pleased: she had long relinquished all interference in myaffairs.” This note went the round of the committee, and at last, afterwhat appeared to me most tedious delay, formal leave was given me tobetter my condition if I could; and an assurance added, that as I hadalways conducted myself well, both as teacher and pupil, at Lowood, atestimonial of character and capacity, signed by the inspectors of thatinstitution, should forthwith be furnished me.This testimonial I accordingly received in about a month, forwarded acopy of it to Mrs. Fairfax, and got that lady’s reply, stating that shewas satisfied, and fixing that day fortnight as the period for myassuming the post of governess in her house.I now busied myself in preparations: the fortnight passed rapidly. Ihad not a very large wardrobe, though it was adequate to my wants; andthe last day sufficed to pack my trunk,—the same I had brought with meeight years ago from Gateshead.The box was corded, the card nailed on. In half-an-hour the carrier wasto call for it to take it to Lowton, whither I myself was to repair atan early hour the next morning to meet the coach. I had brushed myblack stuff travelling-dress, prepared my bonnet, gloves, and muff;sought in all my drawers to see that no article was left behind; andnow having nothing more to do, I sat down and tried to rest. I couldnot; though I had been on foot all day, I could not now repose aninstant; I was too much excited. A phase of my life was closingto-night, a new one opening to-morrow: impossible to slumber in theinterval; I must watch feverishly while the change was beingaccomplished.“Miss,” said a servant who met me in the lobby, where I was wanderinglike a troubled spirit, “a person below wishes to see you.”“The carrier, no doubt,” I thought, and ran downstairs without inquiry.I was passing the back-parlour or teachers’ sitting-room, the door ofwhich was half open, to go to the kitchen, when some one ran out—“It’s her, I am sure!—I could have told her anywhere!” cried theindividual who stopped my progress and took my hand.I looked: I saw a woman attired like a well-dressed servant, matronly,yet still young; very good-looking, with black hair and eyes, andlively complexion.“Well, who is it?” she asked, in a voice and with a smile I halfrecognised; “you’ve not quite forgotten me, I think, Miss Jane?”In another second I was embracing and kissing her rapturously: “Bessie!Bessie! Bessie!” that was all I said; whereat she half laughed, halfcried, and we both went into the parlour. By the fire stood a littlefellow of three years old, in plaid frock and trousers.“That is my little boy,” said Bessie directly.“Then you are married, Bessie?”“Yes; nearly five years since to Robert Leaven, the coachman; and I’vea little girl besides Bobby there, that I’ve christened Jane.”“And you don’t live at Gateshead?”“I live at the lodge: the old porter has left.”“Well, and how do they all get on? Tell me everything about them,Bessie: but sit down first; and, Bobby, come and sit on my knee, willyou?” but Bobby preferred sidling over to his mother.“You’re not grown so very tall, Miss Jane, nor so very stout,”continued Mrs. Leaven. “I dare say they’ve not kept you too well atschool: Miss Reed is the head and shoulders taller than you are; andMiss Georgiana would make two of you in breadth.”“Georgiana is handsome, I suppose, Bessie?”“Very. She went up to London last winter with her mama, and thereeverybody admired her, and a young lord fell in love with her: but hisrelations were against the match; and—what do you think?—he and MissGeorgiana made it up to run away; but they were found out and stopped.It was Miss Reed that found them out: I believe she was envious; andnow she and her sister lead a cat and dog life together; they arealways quarrelling—”“Well, and what of John Reed?”“Oh, he is not doing so well as his mama could wish. He went tocollege, and he got—plucked, I think they call it: and then his uncleswanted him to be a barrister, and study the law: but he is such adissipated young man, they will never make much of him, I think.”“What does he look like?”“He is very tall: some people call him a fine-looking young man; but hehas such thick lips.”“And Mrs. Reed?”“Missis looks stout and well enough in the face, but I think she’s notquite easy in her mind: Mr. John’s conduct does not please her—hespends a deal of money.”“Did she send you here, Bessie?”“No, indeed: but I have long wanted to see you, and when I heard thatthere had been a letter from you, and that you were going to anotherpart of the country, I thought I’d just set off, and get a look at youbefore you were quite out of my reach.”“I am afraid you are disappointed in me, Bessie.” I said this laughing:I perceived that Bessie’s glance, though it expressed regard, did in noshape denote admiration.“No, Miss Jane, not exactly: you are genteel enough; you look like alady, and it is as much as ever I expected of you: you were no beautyas a child.”I smiled at Bessie’s frank answer: I felt that it was correct, but Iconfess I was not quite indifferent to its import: at eighteen mostpeople wish to please, and the conviction that they have not anexterior likely to second that desire brings anything butgratification.“I dare say you are clever, though,” continued Bessie, by way ofsolace. “What can you do? Can you play on the piano?”“A little.”There was one in the room; Bessie went and opened it, and then asked meto sit down and give her a tune: I played a waltz or two, and she wascharmed.“The Miss Reeds could not play as well!” said she exultingly. “I alwayssaid you would surpass them in learning: and can you draw?”“That is one of my paintings over the chimney-piece.” It was alandscape in water colours, of which I had made a present to thesuperintendent, in acknowledgment of her obliging mediation with thecommittee on my behalf, and which she had framed and glazed.“Well, that is beautiful, Miss Jane! It is as fine a picture as anyMiss Reed’s drawing-master could paint, let alone the young ladiesthemselves, who could not come near it: and have you learnt French?”“Yes, Bessie, I can both read it and speak it.”“And you can work on muslin and canvas?”“I can.”“Oh, you are quite a lady, Miss Jane! I knew you would be: you will geton whether your relations notice you or not. There was something Iwanted to ask you. Have you ever heard anything from your father’skinsfolk, the Eyres?”“Never in my life.”“Well, you know Missis always said they were poor and quite despicable:and they may be poor; but I believe they are as much gentry as theReeds are; for one day, nearly seven years ago, a Mr. Eyre came toGateshead and wanted to see you; Missis said you were at school fiftymiles off; he seemed so much disappointed, for he could not stay: hewas going on a voyage to a foreign country, and the ship was to sailfrom London in a day or two. He looked quite a gentleman, and I believehe was your father’s brother.”“What foreign country was he going to, Bessie?”“An island thousands of miles off, where they make wine—the butler didtell me—”“Madeira?” I suggested.“Yes, that is it—that is the very word.”“So he went?”“Yes; he did not stay many minutes in the house: Missis was very highwith him; she called him afterwards a ‘sneaking tradesman.’ My Robertbelieves he was a wine-merchant.”“Very likely,” I returned; “or perhaps clerk or agent to awine-merchant.”Bessie and I conversed about old times an hour longer, and then she wasobliged to leave me: I saw her again for a few minutes the next morningat Lowton, while I was waiting for the coach. We parted finally at thedoor of the Brocklehurst Arms there: each went her separate way; sheset off for the brow of Lowood Fell to meet the conveyance which was totake her back to Gateshead, I mounted the vehicle which was to bear meto new duties and a new life in the unknown environs of Millcote.CHAPTER XIA new chapter in a novel is something like a new scene in a play; andwhen I draw up the curtain this time, reader, you must fancy you see aroom in the George Inn at Millcote, with such large figured papering onthe walls as inn rooms have; such a carpet, such furniture, suchornaments on the mantelpiece, such prints, including a portrait ofGeorge the Third, and another of the Prince of Wales, and arepresentation of the death of Wolfe. All this is visible to you by thelight of an oil lamp hanging from the ceiling, and by that of anexcellent fire, near which I sit in my cloak and bonnet; my muff andumbrella lie on the table, and I am warming away the numbness and chillcontracted by sixteen hours’ exposure to the rawness of an October day:I left Lowton at four o’clock A.M., and the Millcote town clock is nowjust striking eight.Reader, though I look comfortably accommodated, I am not very tranquilin my mind. I thought when the coach stopped here there would be someone to meet me; I looked anxiously round as I descended the woodensteps the “boots” placed for my convenience, expecting to hear my namepronounced, and to see some description of carriage waiting to conveyme to Thornfield. Nothing of the sort was visible; and when I asked awaiter if any one had been to inquire after a Miss Eyre, I was answeredin the negative: so I had no resource but to request to be shown into aprivate room: and here I am waiting, while all sorts of doubts andfears are troubling my thoughts.It is a very strange sensation to inexperienced youth to feel itselfquite alone in the world, cut adrift from every connection, uncertainwhether the port to which it is bound can be reached, and prevented bymany impediments from returning to that it has quitted. The charm ofadventure sweetens that sensation, the glow of pride warms it; but thenthe throb of fear disturbs it; and fear with me became predominant whenhalf-an-hour elapsed and still I was alone. I bethought myself to ringthe bell.“Is there a place in this neighbourhood called Thornfield?” I asked ofthe waiter who answered the summons.“Thornfield? I don’t know, ma’am; I’ll inquire at the bar.” Hevanished, but reappeared instantly—“Is your name Eyre, Miss?”“Yes.”“Person here waiting for you.”I jumped up, took my muff and umbrella, and hastened into theinn-passage: a man was standing by the open door, and in the lamp-litstreet I dimly saw a one-horse conveyance.“This will be your luggage, I suppose?” said the man rather abruptlywhen he saw me, pointing to my trunk in the passage.“Yes.” He hoisted it on to the vehicle, which was a sort of car, andthen I got in; before he shut me up, I asked him how far it was toThornfield.“A matter of six miles.”“How long shall we be before we get there?”“Happen an hour and a half.”He fastened the car door, climbed to his own seat outside, and we setoff. Our progress was leisurely, and gave me ample time to reflect; Iwas content to be at length so near the end of my journey; and as Ileaned back in the comfortable though not elegant conveyance, Imeditated much at my ease.“I suppose,” thought I, “judging from the plainness of the servant andcarriage, Mrs. Fairfax is not a very dashing person: so much thebetter; I never lived amongst fine people but once, and I was verymiserable with them. I wonder if she lives alone except this littlegirl; if so, and if she is in any degree amiable, I shall surely beable to get on with her; I will do my best; it is a pity that doingone’s best does not always answer. At Lowood, indeed, I took thatresolution, kept it, and succeeded in pleasing; but with Mrs. Reed, Iremember my best was always spurned with scorn. I pray God Mrs. Fairfaxmay not turn out a second Mrs. Reed; but if she does, I am not bound tostay with her! let the worst come to the worst, I can advertise again.How far are we on our road now, I wonder?”I let down the window and looked out; Millcote was behind us; judgingby the number of its lights, it seemed a place of considerablemagnitude, much larger than Lowton. We were now, as far as I could see,on a sort of common; but there were houses scattered all over thedistrict; I felt we were in a different region to Lowood, morepopulous, less picturesque; more stirring, less romantic.The roads were heavy, the night misty; my conductor let his horse walkall the way, and the hour and a half extended, I verily believe, to twohours; at last he turned in his seat and said—“You’re noan so far fro’ Thornfield now.”Again I looked out: we were passing a church; I saw its low broad toweragainst the sky, and its bell was tolling a quarter; I saw a narrowgalaxy of lights too, on a hillside, marking a village or hamlet. Aboutten minutes after, the driver got down and opened a pair of gates: wepassed through, and they clashed to behind us. We now slowly ascended adrive, and came upon the long front of a house: candlelight gleamedfrom one curtained bow-window; all the rest were dark. The car stoppedat the front door; it was opened by a maid-servant; I alighted and wentin.“Will you walk this way, ma’am?” said the girl; and I followed heracross a square hall with high doors all round: she ushered me into aroom whose double illumination of fire and candle at first dazzled me,contrasting as it did with the darkness to which my eyes had been fortwo hours inured; when I could see, however, a cosy and agreeablepicture presented itself to my view.A snug small room; a round table by a cheerful fire; an arm-chairhigh-backed and old-fashioned, wherein sat the neatest imaginablelittle elderly lady, in widow’s cap, black silk gown, and snowy muslinapron; exactly like what I had fancied Mrs. Fairfax, only less statelyand milder looking. She was occupied in knitting; a large cat satdemurely at her feet; nothing in short was wanting to complete thebeau-ideal of domestic comfort. A more reassuring introduction for anew governess could scarcely be conceived; there was no grandeur tooverwhelm, no stateliness to embarrass; and then, as I entered, the oldlady got up and promptly and kindly came forward to meet me.“How do you do, my dear? I am afraid you have had a tedious ride; Johndrives so slowly; you must be cold, come to the fire.”“Mrs. Fairfax, I suppose?” said I.“Yes, you are right: do sit down.”She conducted me to her own chair, and then began to remove my shawland untie my bonnet-strings; I begged she would not give herself somuch trouble.“Oh, it is no trouble; I dare say your own hands are almost numbed withcold. Leah, make a little hot negus and cut a sandwich or two: here arethe keys of the storeroom.”And she produced from her pocket a most housewifely bunch of keys, anddelivered them to the servant.“Now, then, draw nearer to the fire,” she continued. “You’ve broughtyour luggage with you, haven’t you, my dear?”“Yes, ma’am.”“I’ll see it carried into your room,” she said, and bustled out.“She treats me like a visitor,” thought I. “I little expected such areception; I anticipated only coldness and stiffness: this is not likewhat I have heard of the treatment of governesses; but I must not exulttoo soon.”She returned; with her own hands cleared her knitting apparatus and abook or two from the table, to make room for the tray which Leah nowbrought, and then herself handed me the refreshments. I felt ratherconfused at being the object of more attention than I had ever beforereceived, and, that too, shown by my employer and superior; but as shedid not herself seem to consider she was doing anything out of herplace, I thought it better to take her civilities quietly.“Shall I have the pleasure of seeing Miss Fairfax to-night?” I asked,when I had partaken of what she offered me.“What did you say, my dear? I am a little deaf,” returned the goodlady, approaching her ear to my mouth.I repeated the question more distinctly.“Miss Fairfax? Oh, you mean Miss Varens! Varens is the name of yourfuture pupil.”“Indeed! Then she is not your daughter?”“No,—I have no family.”I should have followed up my first inquiry, by asking in what way MissVarens was connected with her; but I recollected it was not polite toask too many questions: besides, I was sure to hear in time.“I am so glad,” she continued, as she sat down opposite to me, and tookthe cat on her knee; “I am so glad you are come; it will be quitepleasant living here now with a companion. To be sure it is pleasant atany time; for Thornfield is a fine old hall, rather neglected of lateyears perhaps, but still it is a respectable place; yet you know inwinter-time one feels dreary quite alone in the best quarters. I sayalone—Leah is a nice girl to be sure, and John and his wife are verydecent people; but then you see they are only servants, and one can’tconverse with them on terms of equality: one must keep them at duedistance, for fear of losing one’s authority. I’m sure last winter (itwas a very severe one, if you recollect, and when it did not snow, itrained and blew), not a creature but the butcher and postman came tothe house, from November till February; and I really got quitemelancholy with sitting night after night alone; I had Leah in to readto me sometimes; but I don’t think the poor girl liked the task much:she felt it confining. In spring and summer one got on better: sunshineand long days make such a difference; and then, just at thecommencement of this autumn, little Adela Varens came and her nurse: achild makes a house alive all at once; and now you are here I shall bequite gay.”My heart really warmed to the worthy lady as I heard her talk; and Idrew my chair a little nearer to her, and expressed my sincere wishthat she might find my company as agreeable as she anticipated.“But I’ll not keep you sitting up late to-night,” said she; “it is onthe stroke of twelve now, and you have been travelling all day: youmust feel tired. If you have got your feet well warmed, I’ll show youyour bedroom. I’ve had the room next to mine prepared for you; it isonly a small apartment, but I thought you would like it better than oneof the large front chambers: to be sure they have finer furniture, butthey are so dreary and solitary, I never sleep in them myself.”I thanked her for her considerate choice, and as I really felt fatiguedwith my long journey, expressed my readiness to retire. She took hercandle, and I followed her from the room. First she went to see if thehall-door was fastened; having taken the key from the lock, she led theway upstairs. The steps and banisters were of oak; the staircase windowwas high and latticed; both it and the long gallery into which thebedroom doors opened looked as if they belonged to a church rather thana house. A very chill and vault-like air pervaded the stairs andgallery, suggesting cheerless ideas of space and solitude; and I wasglad, when finally ushered into my chamber, to find it of smalldimensions, and furnished in ordinary, modern style.When Mrs. Fairfax had bidden me a kind good-night, and I had fastenedmy door, gazed leisurely round, and in some measure effaced the eerieimpression made by that wide hall, that dark and spacious staircase,and that long, cold gallery, by the livelier aspect of my little room,I remembered that, after a day of bodily fatigue and mental anxiety, Iwas now at last in safe haven. The impulse of gratitude swelled myheart, and I knelt down at the bedside, and offered up thanks wherethanks were due; not forgetting, ere I rose, to implore aid on myfurther path, and the power of meriting the kindness which seemed sofrankly offered me before it was earned. My couch had no thorns in itthat night; my solitary room no fears. At once weary and content, Islept soon and soundly: when I awoke it was broad day.The chamber looked such a bright little place to me as the sun shone inbetween the gay blue chintz window curtains, showing papered walls anda carpeted floor, so unlike the bare planks and stained plaster ofLowood, that my spirits rose at the view. Externals have a great effecton the young: I thought that a fairer era of life was beginning for me,one that was to have its flowers and pleasures, as well as its thornsand toils. My faculties, roused by the change of scene, the new fieldoffered to hope, seemed all astir. I cannot precisely define what theyexpected, but it was something pleasant: not perhaps that day or thatmonth, but at an indefinite future period.I rose; I dressed myself with care: obliged to be plain—for I had noarticle of attire that was not made with extreme simplicity—I was stillby nature solicitous to be neat. It was not my habit to be disregardfulof appearance or careless of the impression I made: on the contrary, Iever wished to look as well as I could, and to please as much as mywant of beauty would permit. I sometimes regretted that I was nothandsomer; I sometimes wished to have rosy cheeks, a straight nose, andsmall cherry mouth; I desired to be tall, stately, and finely developedin figure; I felt it a misfortune that I was so little, so pale, andhad features so irregular and so marked. And why had I theseaspirations and these regrets? It would be difficult to say: I couldnot then distinctly say it to myself; yet I had a reason, and alogical, natural reason too. However, when I had brushed my hair verysmooth, and put on my black frock—which, Quakerlike as it was, at leasthad the merit of fitting to a nicety—and adjusted my clean whitetucker, I thought I should do respectably enough to appear before Mrs.Fairfax, and that my new pupil would not at least recoil from me withantipathy. Having opened my chamber window, and seen that I left allthings straight and neat on the toilet table, I ventured forth.Traversing the long and matted gallery, I descended the slippery stepsof oak; then I gained the hall: I halted there a minute; I looked atsome pictures on the walls (one, I remember, represented a grim man ina cuirass, and one a lady with powdered hair and a pearl necklace), ata bronze lamp pendent from the ceiling, at a great clock whose case wasof oak curiously carved, and ebon black with time and rubbing.Everything appeared very stately and imposing to me; but then I was solittle accustomed to grandeur. The hall-door, which was half of glass,stood open; I stepped over the threshold. It was a fine autumn morning;the early sun shone serenely on embrowned groves and still greenfields; advancing on to the lawn, I looked up and surveyed the front ofthe mansion. It was three storeys high, of proportions not vast, thoughconsiderable: a gentleman’s manor-house, not a nobleman’s seat:battlements round the top gave it a picturesque look. Its grey frontstood out well from the background of a rookery, whose cawing tenantswere now on the wing: they flew over the lawn and grounds to alight ina great meadow, from which these were separated by a sunk fence, andwhere an array of mighty old thorn trees, strong, knotty, and broad asoaks, at once explained the etymology of the mansion’s designation.Farther off were hills: not so lofty as those round Lowood, nor socraggy, nor so like barriers of separation from the living world; butyet quiet and lonely hills enough, and seeming to embrace Thornfieldwith a seclusion I had not expected to find existent so near thestirring locality of Millcote. A little hamlet, whose roofs were blentwith trees, straggled up the side of one of these hills; the church ofthe district stood nearer Thornfield: its old tower-top looked over aknoll between the house and gates.I was yet enjoying the calm prospect and pleasant fresh air, yetlistening with delight to the cawing of the rooks, yet surveying thewide, hoary front of the hall, and thinking what a great place it wasfor one lonely little dame like Mrs. Fairfax to inhabit, when that ladyappeared at the door.“What! out already?” said she. “I see you are an early riser.” I wentup to her, and was received with an affable kiss and shake of the hand.“How do you like Thornfield?” she asked. I told her I liked it verymuch.“Yes,” she said, “it is a pretty place; but I fear it will be gettingout of order, unless Mr. Rochester should take it into his head to comeand reside here permanently; or, at least, visit it rather oftener:great houses and fine grounds require the presence of the proprietor.”“Mr. Rochester!” I exclaimed. “Who is he?”“The owner of Thornfield,” she responded quietly. “Did you not know hewas called Rochester?”Of course I did not—I had never heard of him before; but the old ladyseemed to regard his existence as a universally understood fact, withwhich everybody must be acquainted by instinct.“I thought,” I continued, “Thornfield belonged to you.”“To me? Bless you, child; what an idea! To me! I am only thehousekeeper—the manager. To be sure I am distantly related to theRochesters by the mother’s side, or at least my husband was; he was aclergyman, incumbent of Hay—that little village yonder on the hill—andthat church near the gates was his. The present Mr. Rochester’s motherwas a Fairfax, and second cousin to my husband: but I never presume onthe connection—in fact, it is nothing to me; I consider myself quite inthe light of an ordinary housekeeper: my employer is always civil, andI expect nothing more.”“And the little girl—my pupil!”“She is Mr. Rochester’s ward; he commissioned me to find a governessfor her. He intended to have her brought up in ——shire, I believe. Hereshe comes, with her ‘bonne,’ as she calls her nurse.” The enigma thenwas explained: this affable and kind little widow was no great dame;but a dependent like myself. I did not like her the worse for that; onthe contrary, I felt better pleased than ever. The equality between herand me was real; not the mere result of condescension on her part: somuch the better—my position was all the freer.As I was meditating on this discovery, a little girl, followed by herattendant, came running up the lawn. I looked at my pupil, who did notat first appear to notice me: she was quite a child, perhaps seven oreight years old, slightly built, with a pale, small-featured face, anda redundancy of hair falling in curls to her waist.“Good morning, Miss Adela,” said Mrs. Fairfax. “Come and speak to thelady who is to teach you, and to make you a clever woman some day.” Sheapproached.“C’est là ma gouvernante!” said she, pointing to me, and addressing hernurse; who answered—“Mais oui, certainement.”“Are they foreigners?” I inquired, amazed at hearing the Frenchlanguage.“The nurse is a foreigner, and Adela was born on the Continent; and, Ibelieve, never left it till within six months ago. When she first camehere she could speak no English; now she can make shift to talk it alittle: I don’t understand her, she mixes it so with French; but youwill make out her meaning very well, I dare say.”Fortunately I had had the advantage of being taught French by a Frenchlady; and as I had always made a point of conversing with MadamePierrot as often as I could, and had besides, during the last sevenyears, learnt a portion of French by heart daily—applying myself totake pains with my accent, and imitating as closely as possible thepronunciation of my teacher, I had acquired a certain degree ofreadiness and correctness in the language, and was not likely to bemuch at a loss with Mademoiselle Adela. She came and shook hands withme when she heard that I was her governess; and as I led her in tobreakfast, I addressed some phrases to her in her own tongue: shereplied briefly at first, but after we were seated at the table, andshe had examined me some ten minutes with her large hazel eyes, shesuddenly commenced chattering fluently.“Ah!” cried she, in French, “you speak my language as well as Mr.Rochester does: I can talk to you as I can to him, and so can Sophie.She will be glad: nobody here understands her: Madame Fairfax is allEnglish. Sophie is my nurse; she came with me over the sea in a greatship with a chimney that smoked—how it did smoke!—and I was sick, andso was Sophie, and so was Mr. Rochester. Mr. Rochester lay down on asofa in a pretty room called the salon, and Sophie and I had littlebeds in another place. I nearly fell out of mine; it was like a shelf.And Mademoiselle—what is your name?”“Eyre—Jane Eyre.”“Aire? Bah! I cannot say it. Well, our ship stopped in the morning,before it was quite daylight, at a great city—a huge city, with verydark houses and all smoky; not at all like the pretty clean town I camefrom; and Mr. Rochester carried me in his arms over a plank to theland, and Sophie came after, and we all got into a coach, which took usto a beautiful large house, larger than this and finer, called anhotel. We stayed there nearly a week: I and Sophie used to walk everyday in a great green place full of trees, called the Park; and therewere many children there besides me, and a pond with beautiful birds init, that I fed with crumbs.”“Can you understand her when she runs on so fast?” asked Mrs. Fairfax.I understood her very well, for I had been accustomed to the fluenttongue of Madame Pierrot.“I wish,” continued the good lady, “you would ask her a question or twoabout her parents: I wonder if she remembers them?”“Adèle,” I inquired, “with whom did you live when you were in thatpretty clean town you spoke of?”“I lived long ago with mama; but she is gone to the Holy Virgin. Mamaused to teach me to dance and sing, and to say verses. A great manygentlemen and ladies came to see mama, and I used to dance before them,or to sit on their knees and sing to them: I liked it. Shall I let youhear me sing now?”She had finished her breakfast, so I permitted her to give a specimenof her accomplishments. Descending from her chair, she came and placedherself on my knee; then, folding her little hands demurely before her,shaking back her curls and lifting her eyes to the ceiling, shecommenced singing a song from some opera. It was the strain of aforsaken lady, who, after bewailing the perfidy of her lover, callspride to her aid; desires her attendant to deck her in her brightestjewels and richest robes, and resolves to meet the false one that nightat a ball, and prove to him, by the gaiety of her demeanour, how littlehis desertion has affected her.The subject seemed strangely chosen for an infant singer; but I supposethe point of the exhibition lay in hearing the notes of love andjealousy warbled with the lisp of childhood; and in very bad taste thatpoint was: at least I thought so.Adèle sang the canzonette tunefully enough, and with the _naïveté_ ofher age. This achieved, she jumped from my knee and said, “Now,Mademoiselle, I will repeat you some poetry.”Assuming an attitude, she began, “La Ligue des Rats: fable de LaFontaine.” She then declaimed the little piece with an attention topunctuation and emphasis, a flexibility of voice and an appropriatenessof gesture, very unusual indeed at her age, and which proved she hadbeen carefully trained.“Was it your mama who taught you that piece?” I asked.“Yes, and she just used to say it in this way: ‘Qu’avez vous donc? luidit un de ces rats; parlez!’ She made me lift my hand—so—to remind meto raise my voice at the question. Now shall I dance for you?”“No, that will do: but after your mama went to the Holy Virgin, as yousay, with whom did you live then?”“With Madame Frédéric and her husband: she took care of me, but she isnothing related to me. I think she is poor, for she had not so fine ahouse as mama. I was not long there. Mr. Rochester asked me if I wouldlike to go and live with him in England, and I said yes; for I knew Mr.Rochester before I knew Madame Frédéric, and he was always kind to meand gave me pretty dresses and toys: but you see he has not kept hisword, for he has brought me to England, and now he is gone back againhimself, and I never see him.”After breakfast, Adèle and I withdrew to the library, which room, itappears, Mr. Rochester had directed should be used as the schoolroom.Most of the books were locked up behind glass doors; but there was onebookcase left open containing everything that could be needed in theway of elementary works, and several volumes of light literature,poetry, biography, travels, a few romances, &c. I suppose he hadconsidered that these were all the governess would require for herprivate perusal; and, indeed, they contented me amply for the present;compared with the scanty pickings I had now and then been able to gleanat Lowood, they seemed to offer an abundant harvest of entertainmentand information. In this room, too, there was a cabinet piano, quitenew and of superior tone; also an easel for painting and a pair ofglobes.I found my pupil sufficiently docile, though disinclined to apply: shehad not been used to regular occupation of any kind. I felt it would beinjudicious to confine her too much at first; so, when I had talked toher a great deal, and got her to learn a little, and when the morninghad advanced to noon, I allowed her to return to her nurse. I thenproposed to occupy myself till dinner-time in drawing some littlesketches for her use.As I was going upstairs to fetch my portfolio and pencils, Mrs. Fairfaxcalled to me: “Your morning school-hours are over now, I suppose,” saidshe. She was in a room the folding-doors of which stood open: I went inwhen she addressed me. It was a large, stately apartment, with purplechairs and curtains, a Turkey carpet, walnut-panelled walls, one vastwindow rich in stained glass, and a lofty ceiling, nobly moulded. Mrs.Fairfax was dusting some vases of fine purple spar, which stood on asideboard.“What a beautiful room!” I exclaimed, as I looked round; for I hadnever before seen any half so imposing.“Yes; this is the dining-room. I have just opened the window, to let ina little air and sunshine; for everything gets so damp in apartmentsthat are seldom inhabited; the drawing-room yonder feels like a vault.”She pointed to a wide arch corresponding to the window, and hung likeit with a Tyrian-dyed curtain, now looped up. Mounting to it by twobroad steps, and looking through, I thought I caught a glimpse of afairy place, so bright to my novice-eyes appeared the view beyond. Yetit was merely a very pretty drawing-room, and within it a boudoir, bothspread with white carpets, on which seemed laid brilliant garlands offlowers; both ceiled with snowy mouldings of white grapes andvine-leaves, beneath which glowed in rich contrast crimson couches andottomans; while the ornaments on the pale Parian mantelpiece were ofsparkling Bohemian glass, ruby red; and between the windows largemirrors repeated the general blending of snow and fire.“In what order you keep these rooms, Mrs. Fairfax!” said I. “No dust,no canvas coverings: except that the air feels chilly, one would thinkthey were inhabited daily.”“Why, Miss Eyre, though Mr. Rochester’s visits here are rare, they arealways sudden and unexpected; and as I observed that it put him out tofind everything swathed up, and to have a bustle of arrangement on hisarrival, I thought it best to keep the rooms in readiness.”“Is Mr. Rochester an exacting, fastidious sort of man?”“Not particularly so; but he has a gentleman’s tastes and habits, andhe expects to have things managed in conformity to them.”“Do you like him? Is he generally liked?”“Oh, yes; the family have always been respected here. Almost all theland in this neighbourhood, as far as you can see, has belonged to theRochesters time out of mind.”“Well, but, leaving his land out of the question, do you like him? Ishe liked for himself?”“_I_ have no cause to do otherwise than like him; and I believe he isconsidered a just and liberal landlord by his tenants: but he has neverlived much amongst them.”“But has he no peculiarities? What, in short, is his character?”“Oh! his character is unimpeachable, I suppose. He is rather peculiar,perhaps: he has travelled a great deal, and seen a great deal of theworld, I should think. I dare say he is clever, but I never had muchconversation with him.”“In what way is he peculiar?”“I don’t know—it is not easy to describe—nothing striking, but you feelit when he speaks to you; you cannot be always sure whether he is injest or earnest, whether he is pleased or the contrary; you don’tthoroughly understand him, in short—at least, I don’t: but it is of noconsequence, he is a very good master.”This was all the account I got from Mrs. Fairfax of her employer andmine. There are people who seem to have no notion of sketching acharacter, or observing and describing salient points, either inpersons or things: the good lady evidently belonged to this class; myqueries puzzled, but did not draw her out. Mr. Rochester was Mr.Rochester in her eyes; a gentleman, a landed proprietor—nothing more:she inquired and searched no further, and evidently wondered at my wishto gain a more definite notion of his identity.When we left the dining-room, she proposed to show me over the rest ofthe house; and I followed her upstairs and downstairs, admiring as Iwent; for all was well arranged and handsome. The large front chambersI thought especially grand: and some of the third-storey rooms, thoughdark and low, were interesting from their air of antiquity. Thefurniture once appropriated to the lower apartments had from time totime been removed here, as fashions changed: and the imperfect lightentering by their narrow casement showed bedsteads of a hundred yearsold; chests in oak or walnut, looking, with their strange carvings ofpalm branches and cherubs’ heads, like types of the Hebrew ark; rows ofvenerable chairs, high-backed and narrow; stools still more antiquated,on whose cushioned tops were yet apparent traces of half-effacedembroideries, wrought by fingers that for two generations had beencoffin-dust. All these relics gave to the third storey of ThornfieldHall the aspect of a home of the past: a shrine of memory. I liked thehush, the gloom, the quaintness of these retreats in the day; but I byno means coveted a night’s repose on one of those wide and heavy beds:shut in, some of them, with doors of oak; shaded, others, with wroughtold English hangings crusted with thick work, portraying effigies ofstrange flowers, and stranger birds, and strangest human beings,—allwhich would have looked strange, indeed, by the pallid gleam ofmoonlight.“Do the servants sleep in these rooms?” I asked.“No; they occupy a range of smaller apartments to the back; no one eversleeps here: one would almost say that, if there were a ghost atThornfield Hall, this would be its haunt.”“So I think: you have no ghost, then?”“None that I ever heard of,” returned Mrs. Fairfax, smiling.“Nor any traditions of one? no legends or ghost stories?”“I believe not. And yet it is said the Rochesters have been rather aviolent than a quiet race in their time: perhaps, though, that is thereason they rest tranquilly in their graves now.”“Yes—‘after life’s fitful fever they sleep well,’” I muttered. “Whereare you going now, Mrs. Fairfax?” for she was moving away.“On to the leads; will you come and see the view from thence?” Ifollowed still, up a very narrow staircase to the attics, and thence bya ladder and through a trap-door to the roof of the hall. I was now ona level with the crow colony, and could see into their nests. Leaningover the battlements and looking far down, I surveyed the grounds laidout like a map: the bright and velvet lawn closely girdling the greybase of the mansion; the field, wide as a park, dotted with its ancienttimber; the wood, dun and sere, divided by a path visibly overgrown,greener with moss than the trees were with foliage; the church at thegates, the road, the tranquil hills, all reposing in the autumn day’ssun; the horizon bounded by a propitious sky, azure, marbled withpearly white. No feature in the scene was extraordinary, but all waspleasing. When I turned from it and repassed the trap-door, I couldscarcely see my way down the ladder; the attic seemed black as a vaultcompared with that arch of blue air to which I had been looking up, andto that sunlit scene of grove, pasture, and green hill, of which thehall was the centre, and over which I had been gazing with delight.Mrs. Fairfax stayed behind a moment to fasten the trap-door; I, by dintof groping, found the outlet from the attic, and proceeded to descendthe narrow garret staircase. I lingered in the long passage to whichthis led, separating the front and back rooms of the third storey:narrow, low, and dim, with only one little window at the far end, andlooking, with its two rows of small black doors all shut, like acorridor in some Bluebeard’s castle.While I paced softly on, the last sound I expected to hear in so stilla region, a laugh, struck my ear. It was a curious laugh; distinct,formal, mirthless. I stopped: the sound ceased, only for an instant; itbegan again, louder: for at first, though distinct, it was very low. Itpassed off in a clamorous peal that seemed to wake an echo in everylonely chamber; though it originated but in one, and I could havepointed out the door whence the accents issued.“Mrs. Fairfax!” I called out: for I now heard her descending the greatstairs. “Did you hear that loud laugh? Who is it?”“Some of the servants, very likely,” she answered: “perhaps GracePoole.”“Did you hear it?” I again inquired.“Yes, plainly: I often hear her: she sews in one of these rooms.Sometimes Leah is with her; they are frequently noisy together.”The laugh was repeated in its low, syllabic tone, and terminated in anodd murmur.“Grace!” exclaimed Mrs. Fairfax.I really did not expect any Grace to answer; for the laugh was astragic, as preternatural a laugh as any I ever heard; and, but that itwas high noon, and that no circumstance of ghostliness accompanied thecurious cachinnation; but that neither scene nor season favoured fear,I should have been superstitiously afraid. However, the event showed meI was a fool for entertaining a sense even of surprise.The door nearest me opened, and a servant came out,—a woman of betweenthirty and forty; a set, square-made figure, red-haired, and with ahard, plain face: any apparition less romantic or less ghostly couldscarcely be conceived.“Too much noise, Grace,” said Mrs. Fairfax. “Remember directions!”Grace curtseyed silently and went in.“She is a person we have to sew and assist Leah in her housemaid’swork,” continued the widow; “not altogether unobjectionable in somepoints, but she does well enough. By-the-bye, how have you got on withyour new pupil this morning?”The conversation, thus turned on Adèle, continued till we reached thelight and cheerful region below. Adèle came running to meet us in thehall, exclaiming—“Mesdames, vous êtes servies!” adding, “J’ai bien faim, moi!”We found dinner ready, and waiting for us in Mrs. Fairfax’s room.CHAPTER XIIThe promise of a smooth career, which my first calm introduction toThornfield Hall seemed to pledge, was not belied on a longeracquaintance with the place and its inmates. Mrs. Fairfax turned out tobe what she appeared, a placid-tempered, kind-natured woman, ofcompetent education and average intelligence. My pupil was a livelychild, who had been spoilt and indulged, and therefore was sometimeswayward; but as she was committed entirely to my care, and noinjudicious interference from any quarter ever thwarted my plans forher improvement, she soon forgot her little freaks, and became obedientand teachable. She had no great talents, no marked traits of character,no peculiar development of feeling or taste which raised her one inchabove the ordinary level of childhood; but neither had she anydeficiency or vice which sunk her below it. She made reasonableprogress, entertained for me a vivacious, though perhaps not veryprofound, affection; and by her simplicity, gay prattle, and efforts toplease, inspired me, in return, with a degree of attachment sufficientto make us both content in each other’s society.This, _par parenthèse_, will be thought cool language by persons whoentertain solemn doctrines about the angelic nature of children, andthe duty of those charged with their education to conceive for them anidolatrous devotion: but I am not writing to flatter parental egotism,to echo cant, or prop up humbug; I am merely telling the truth. I felta conscientious solicitude for Adèle’s welfare and progress, and aquiet liking for her little self: just as I cherished towards Mrs.Fairfax a thankfulness for her kindness, and a pleasure in her societyproportionate to the tranquil regard she had for me, and the moderationof her mind and character.Anybody may blame me who likes, when I add further, that, now and then,when I took a walk by myself in the grounds; when I went down to thegates and looked through them along the road; or when, while Adèleplayed with her nurse, and Mrs. Fairfax made jellies in the storeroom,I climbed the three staircases, raised the trap-door of the attic, andhaving reached the leads, looked out afar over sequestered field andhill, and along dim sky-line—that then I longed for a power of visionwhich might overpass that limit; which might reach the busy world,towns, regions full of life I had heard of but never seen—that then Idesired more of practical experience than I possessed; more ofintercourse with my kind, of acquaintance with variety of character,than was here within my reach. I valued what was good in Mrs. Fairfax,and what was good in Adèle; but I believed in the existence of otherand more vivid kinds of goodness, and what I believed in I wished tobehold.Who blames me? Many, no doubt; and I shall be called discontented. Icould not help it: the restlessness was in my nature; it agitated me topain sometimes. Then my sole relief was to walk along the corridor ofthe third storey, backwards and forwards, safe in the silence andsolitude of the spot, and allow my mind’s eye to dwell on whateverbright visions rose before it—and, certainly, they were many andglowing; to let my heart be heaved by the exultant movement, which,while it swelled it in trouble, expanded it with life; and, best ofall, to open my inward ear to a tale that was never ended—a tale myimagination created, and narrated continuously; quickened with all ofincident, life, fire, feeling, that I desired and had not in my actualexistence.It is in vain to say human beings ought to be satisfied withtranquillity: they must have action; and they will make it if theycannot find it. Millions are condemned to a stiller doom than mine, andmillions are in silent revolt against their lot. Nobody knows how manyrebellions besides political rebellions ferment in the masses of lifewhich people earth. Women are supposed to be very calm generally: butwomen feel just as men feel; they need exercise for their faculties,and a field for their efforts, as much as their brothers do; theysuffer from too rigid a restraint, too absolute a stagnation, preciselyas men would suffer; and it is narrow-minded in their more privilegedfellow-creatures to say that they ought to confine themselves to makingpuddings and knitting stockings, to playing on the piano andembroidering bags. It is thoughtless to condemn them, or laugh at them,if they seek to do more or learn more than custom has pronouncednecessary for their sex.When thus alone, I not unfrequently heard Grace Poole’s laugh: the samepeal, the same low, slow ha! ha! which, when first heard, had thrilledme: I heard, too, her eccentric murmurs; stranger than her laugh. Therewere days when she was quite silent; but there were others when I couldnot account for the sounds she made. Sometimes I saw her: she wouldcome out of her room with a basin, or a plate, or a tray in her hand,go down to the kitchen and shortly return, generally (oh, romanticreader, forgive me for telling the plain truth!) bearing a pot ofporter. Her appearance always acted as a damper to the curiosity raisedby her oral oddities: hard-featured and staid, she had no point towhich interest could attach. I made some attempts to draw her intoconversation, but she seemed a person of few words: a monosyllabicreply usually cut short every effort of that sort.The other members of the household, viz., John and his wife, Leah thehousemaid, and Sophie the French nurse, were decent people; but in norespect remarkable; with Sophie I used to talk French, and sometimes Iasked her questions about her native country; but she was not of adescriptive or narrative turn, and generally gave such vapid andconfused answers as were calculated rather to check than encourageinquiry.October, November, December passed away. One afternoon in January, Mrs.Fairfax had begged a holiday for Adèle, because she had a cold; and, asAdèle seconded the request with an ardour that reminded me how preciousoccasional holidays had been to me in my own childhood, I accorded it,deeming that I did well in showing pliability on the point. It was afine, calm day, though very cold; I was tired of sitting still in thelibrary through a whole long morning: Mrs. Fairfax had just written aletter which was waiting to be posted, so I put on my bonnet and cloakand volunteered to carry it to Hay; the distance, two miles, would be apleasant winter afternoon walk. Having seen Adèle comfortably seated inher little chair by Mrs. Fairfax’s parlour fireside, and given her herbest wax doll (which I usually kept enveloped in silver paper in adrawer) to play with, and a story-book for change of amusement; andhaving replied to her “Revenez bientôt, ma bonne amie, ma chère Mdlle.Jeannette,” with a kiss I set out.The ground was hard, the air was still, my road was lonely; I walkedfast till I got warm, and then I walked slowly to enjoy and analyse thespecies of pleasure brooding for me in the hour and situation. It wasthree o’clock; the church bell tolled as I passed under the belfry: thecharm of the hour lay in its approaching dimness, in the low-glidingand pale-beaming sun. I was a mile from Thornfield, in a lane noted forwild roses in summer, for nuts and blackberries in autumn, and even nowpossessing a few coral treasures in hips and haws, but whose bestwinter delight lay in its utter solitude and leafless repose. If abreath of air stirred, it made no sound here; for there was not aholly, not an evergreen to rustle, and the stripped hawthorn and hazelbushes were as still as the white, worn stones which causewayed themiddle of the path. Far and wide, on each side, there were only fields,where no cattle now browsed; and the little brown birds, which stirredoccasionally in the hedge, looked like single russet leaves that hadforgotten to drop.This lane inclined up-hill all the way to Hay; having reached themiddle, I sat down on a stile which led thence into a field. Gatheringmy mantle about me, and sheltering my hands in my muff, I did not feelthe cold, though it froze keenly; as was attested by a sheet of icecovering the causeway, where a little brooklet, now congealed, hadoverflowed after a rapid thaw some days since. From my seat I couldlook down on Thornfield: the grey and battlemented hall was theprincipal object in the vale below me; its woods and dark rookery roseagainst the west. I lingered till the sun went down amongst the trees,and sank crimson and clear behind them. I then turned eastward.On the hill-top above me sat the rising moon; pale yet as a cloud, butbrightening momentarily, she looked over Hay, which, half lost intrees, sent up a blue smoke from its few chimneys: it was yet a miledistant, but in the absolute hush I could hear plainly its thin murmursof life. My ear, too, felt the flow of currents; in what dales anddepths I could not tell: but there were many hills beyond Hay, anddoubtless many becks threading their passes. That evening calm betrayedalike the tinkle of the nearest streams, the sough of the most remote.A rude noise broke on these fine ripplings and whisperings, at once sofar away and so clear: a positive tramp, tramp, a metallic clatter,which effaced the soft wave-wanderings; as, in a picture, the solidmass of a crag, or the rough boles of a great oak, drawn in dark andstrong on the foreground, efface the aërial distance of azure hill,sunny horizon, and blended clouds where tint melts into tint.The din was on the causeway: a horse was coming; the windings of thelane yet hid it, but it approached. I was just leaving the stile; yet,as the path was narrow, I sat still to let it go by. In those days Iwas young, and all sorts of fancies bright and dark tenanted my mind:the memories of nursery stories were there amongst other rubbish; andwhen they recurred, maturing youth added to them a vigour and vividnessbeyond what childhood could give. As this horse approached, and as Iwatched for it to appear through the dusk, I remembered certain ofBessie’s tales, wherein figured a North-of-England spirit called a“Gytrash,” which, in the form of horse, mule, or large dog, hauntedsolitary ways, and sometimes came upon belated travellers, as thishorse was now coming upon me.It was very near, but not yet in sight; when, in addition to the tramp,tramp, I heard a rush under the hedge, and close down by the hazelstems glided a great dog, whose black and white colour made him adistinct object against the trees. It was exactly one form of Bessie’sGytrash—a lion-like creature with long hair and a huge head: it passedme, however, quietly enough; not staying to look up, with strangepretercanine eyes, in my face, as I half expected it would. The horsefollowed,—a tall steed, and on its back a rider. The man, the humanbeing, broke the spell at once. Nothing ever rode the Gytrash: it wasalways alone; and goblins, to my notions, though they might tenant thedumb carcasses of beasts, could scarce covet shelter in the commonplacehuman form. No Gytrash was this,—only a traveller taking the short cutto Millcote. He passed, and I went on; a few steps, and I turned: asliding sound and an exclamation of “What the deuce is to do now?” anda clattering tumble, arrested my attention. Man and horse were down;they had slipped on the sheet of ice which glazed the causeway. The dogcame bounding back, and seeing his master in a predicament, and hearingthe horse groan, barked till the evening hills echoed the sound, whichwas deep in proportion to his magnitude. He snuffed round the prostrategroup, and then he ran up to me; it was all he could do,—there was noother help at hand to summon. I obeyed him, and walked down to thetraveller, by this time struggling himself free of his steed. Hisefforts were so vigorous, I thought he could not be much hurt; but Iasked him the question—“Are you injured, sir?”I think he was swearing, but am not certain; however, he waspronouncing some formula which prevented him from replying to medirectly.“Can I do anything?” I asked again.“You must just stand on one side,” he answered as he rose, first to hisknees, and then to his feet. I did; whereupon began a heaving,stamping, clattering process, accompanied by a barking and baying whichremoved me effectually some yards’ distance; but I would not be drivenquite away till I saw the event. This was finally fortunate; the horsewas re-established, and the dog was silenced with a “Down, Pilot!” Thetraveller now, stooping, felt his foot and leg, as if trying whetherthey were sound; apparently something ailed them, for he halted to thestile whence I had just risen, and sat down.I was in the mood for being useful, or at least officious, I think, forI now drew near him again.“If you are hurt, and want help, sir, I can fetch some one either fromThornfield Hall or from Hay.”“Thank you: I shall do: I have no broken bones,—only a sprain;” andagain he stood up and tried his foot, but the result extorted aninvoluntary “Ugh!”Something of daylight still lingered, and the moon was waxing bright: Icould see him plainly. His figure was enveloped in a riding cloak, furcollared and steel clasped; its details were not apparent, but I tracedthe general points of middle height and considerable breadth of chest.He had a dark face, with stern features and a heavy brow; his eyes andgathered eyebrows looked ireful and thwarted just now; he was pastyouth, but had not reached middle-age; perhaps he might be thirty-five.I felt no fear of him, and but little shyness. Had he been a handsome,heroic-looking young gentleman, I should not have dared to stand thusquestioning him against his will, and offering my services unasked. Ihad hardly ever seen a handsome youth; never in my life spoken to one.I had a theoretical reverence and homage for beauty, elegance,gallantry, fascination; but had I met those qualities incarnate inmasculine shape, I should have known instinctively that they neitherhad nor could have sympathy with anything in me, and should haveshunned them as one would fire, lightning, or anything else that isbright but antipathetic.If even this stranger had smiled and been good-humoured to me when Iaddressed him; if he had put off my offer of assistance gaily and withthanks, I should have gone on my way and not felt any vocation to renewinquiries: but the frown, the roughness of the traveller, set me at myease: I retained my station when he waved to me to go, and announced—“I cannot think of leaving you, sir, at so late an hour, in thissolitary lane, till I see you are fit to mount your horse.”He looked at me when I said this; he had hardly turned his eyes in mydirection before.“I should think you ought to be at home yourself,” said he, “if youhave a home in this neighbourhood: where do you come from?”“From just below; and I am not at all afraid of being out late when itis moonlight: I will run over to Hay for you with pleasure, if you wishit: indeed, I am going there to post a letter.”“You live just below—do you mean at that house with the battlements?”pointing to Thornfield Hall, on which the moon cast a hoary gleam,bringing it out distinct and pale from the woods that, by contrast withthe western sky, now seemed one mass of shadow.“Yes, sir.”“Whose house is it?”“Mr. Rochester’s.”“Do you know Mr. Rochester?”“No, I have never seen him.”“He is not resident, then?”“No.”“Can you tell me where he is?”“I cannot.”“You are not a servant at the hall, of course. You are—” He stopped,ran his eye over my dress, which, as usual, was quite simple: a blackmerino cloak, a black beaver bonnet; neither of them half fine enoughfor a lady’s-maid. He seemed puzzled to decide what I was; I helpedhim.“I am the governess.”“Ah, the governess!” he repeated; “deuce take me, if I had notforgotten! The governess!” and again my raiment underwent scrutiny. Intwo minutes he rose from the stile: his face expressed pain when hetried to move.“I cannot commission you to fetch help,” he said; “but you may help mea little yourself, if you will be so kind.”“Yes, sir.”“You have not an umbrella that I can use as a stick?”“No.”“Try to get hold of my horse’s bridle and lead him to me: you are notafraid?”I should have been afraid to touch a horse when alone, but when told todo it, I was disposed to obey. I put down my muff on the stile, andwent up to the tall steed; I endeavoured to catch the bridle, but itwas a spirited thing, and would not let me come near its head; I madeeffort on effort, though in vain: meantime, I was mortally afraid ofits trampling fore-feet. The traveller waited and watched for sometime, and at last he laughed.I was mortally afraid of its trampling forefeet“I see,” he said, “the mountain will never be brought to Mahomet, soall you can do is to aid Mahomet to go to the mountain; I must beg ofyou to come here.”I came. “Excuse me,” he continued: “necessity compels me to make youuseful.” He laid a heavy hand on my shoulder, and leaning on me withsome stress, limped to his horse. Having once caught the bridle, hemastered it directly and sprang to his saddle; grimacing grimly as hemade the effort, for it wrenched his sprain.“Now,” said he, releasing his under lip from a hard bite, “just hand memy whip; it lies there under the hedge.”I sought it and found it.“Thank you; now make haste with the letter to Hay, and return as fastas you can.”A touch of a spurred heel made his horse first start and rear, and thenbound away; the dog rushed in his traces; all three vanished,“Like heath that, in the wilderness,    The wild wind whirls away.”I took up my muff and walked on. The incident had occurred and was gonefor me: it _was_ an incident of no moment, no romance, no interest in asense; yet it marked with change one single hour of a monotonous life.My help had been needed and claimed; I had given it: I was pleased tohave done something; trivial, transitory though the deed was, it wasyet an active thing, and I was weary of an existence all passive. Thenew face, too, was like a new picture introduced to the gallery ofmemory; and it was dissimilar to all the others hanging there: firstly,because it was masculine; and, secondly, because it was dark, strong,and stern. I had it still before me when I entered Hay, and slipped theletter into the post-office; I saw it as I walked fast down-hill allthe way home. When I came to the stile, I stopped a minute, lookedround and listened, with an idea that a horse’s hoofs might ring on thecauseway again, and that a rider in a cloak, and a Gytrash-likeNewfoundland dog, might be again apparent: I saw only the hedge and apollard willow before me, rising up still and straight to meet themoonbeams; I heard only the faintest waft of wind roaming fitful amongthe trees round Thornfield, a mile distant; and when I glanced down inthe direction of the murmur, my eye, traversing the hall-front, caughta light kindling in a window: it reminded me that I was late, and Ihurried on.I did not like re-entering Thornfield. To pass its threshold was toreturn to stagnation; to cross the silent hall, to ascend the darksomestaircase, to seek my own lonely little room, and then to meet tranquilMrs. Fairfax, and spend the long winter evening with her, and her only,was to quell wholly the faint excitement wakened by my walk,—to slipagain over my faculties the viewless fetters of an uniform and toostill existence; of an existence whose very privileges of security andease I was becoming incapable of appreciating. What good it would havedone me at that time to have been tossed in the storms of an uncertainstruggling life, and to have been taught by rough and bitter experienceto long for the calm amidst which I now repined! Yes, just as much goodas it would do a man tired of sitting still in a “too easy chair” totake a long walk: and just as natural was the wish to stir, under mycircumstances, as it would be under his.I lingered at the gates; I lingered on the lawn; I paced backwards andforwards on the pavement; the shutters of the glass door were closed; Icould not see into the interior; and both my eyes and spirit seemeddrawn from the gloomy house—from the grey hollow filled with raylesscells, as it appeared to me—to that sky expanded before me,—a blue seaabsolved from taint of cloud; the moon ascending it in solemn march;her orb seeming to look up as she left the hill-tops, from behind whichshe had come, far and farther below her, and aspired to the zenith,midnight dark in its fathomless depth and measureless distance; and forthose trembling stars that followed her course; they made my hearttremble, my veins glow when I viewed them. Little things recall us toearth; the clock struck in the hall; that sufficed; I turned from moonand stars, opened a side-door, and went in.The hall was not dark, nor yet was it lit, only by the high-hung bronzelamp; a warm glow suffused both it and the lower steps of the oakstaircase. This ruddy shine issued from the great dining-room, whosetwo-leaved door stood open, and showed a genial fire in the grate,glancing on marble hearth and brass fire-irons, and revealing purpledraperies and polished furniture, in the most pleasant radiance. Itrevealed, too, a group near the mantelpiece: I had scarcely caught it,and scarcely become aware of a cheerful mingling of voices, amongstwhich I seemed to distinguish the tones of Adèle, when the door closed.I hastened to Mrs. Fairfax’s room; there was a fire there too, but nocandle, and no Mrs. Fairfax. Instead, all alone, sitting upright on therug, and gazing with gravity at the blaze, I beheld a great black andwhite long-haired dog, just like the Gytrash of the lane. It was solike it that I went forward and said—“Pilot,” and the thing got up andcame to me and snuffed me. I caressed him, and he wagged his greattail; but he looked an eerie creature to be alone with, and I could nottell whence he had come. I rang the bell, for I wanted a candle; and Iwanted, too, to get an account of this visitant. Leah entered.“What dog is this?”“He came with master.”“With whom?”“With master—Mr. Rochester—he is just arrived.”“Indeed! and is Mrs. Fairfax with him?”“Yes, and Miss Adèle; they are in the dining-room, and John is gone fora surgeon; for master has had an accident; his horse fell and his ankleis sprained.”“Did the horse fall in Hay Lane?”“Yes, coming down-hill; it slipped on some ice.”“Ah! Bring me a candle will you Leah?”Leah brought it; she entered, followed by Mrs. Fairfax, who repeatedthe news; adding that Mr. Carter the surgeon was come, and was now withMr. Rochester: then she hurried out to give orders about tea, and Iwent upstairs to take off my things.CHAPTER XIIIMr. Rochester, it seems, by the surgeon’s orders, went to bed earlythat night; nor did he rise soon next morning. When he did come down,it was to attend to business: his agent and some of his tenants werearrived, and waiting to speak with him.Adèle and I had now to vacate the library: it would be in dailyrequisition as a reception-room for callers. A fire was lit in anapartment upstairs, and there I carried our books, and arranged it forthe future schoolroom. I discerned in the course of the morning thatThornfield Hall was a changed place: no longer silent as a church, itechoed every hour or two to a knock at the door, or a clang of thebell; steps, too, often traversed the hall, and new voices spoke indifferent keys below; a rill from the outer world was flowing throughit; it had a master: for my part, I liked it better.Adèle was not easy to teach that day; she could not apply: she keptrunning to the door and looking over the banisters to see if she couldget a glimpse of Mr. Rochester; then she coined pretexts to godownstairs, in order, as I shrewdly suspected, to visit the library,where I knew she was not wanted; then, when I got a little angry, andmade her sit still, she continued to talk incessantly of her “ami,Monsieur Edouard Fairfax _de_ Rochester,” as she dubbed him (I had notbefore heard his prenomens), and to conjecture what presents he hadbrought her: for it appears he had intimated the night before, thatwhen his luggage came from Millcote, there would be found amongst it alittle box in whose contents she had an interest.“Et cela doit signifier,” said she, “qu’il y aura là dedans un cadeaupour moi, et peut-être pour vous aussi, mademoiselle. Monsieur a parléde vous: il m’a demandé le nom de ma gouvernante, et si elle n’étaitpas une petite personne, assez mince et un peu pâle. J’ai dit qu’oui:car c’est vrai, n’est-ce pas, mademoiselle?”I and my pupil dined as usual in Mrs. Fairfax’s parlour; the afternoonwas wild and snowy, and we passed it in the schoolroom. At dark Iallowed Adèle to put away books and work, and to run downstairs; for,from the comparative silence below, and from the cessation of appealsto the door-bell, I conjectured that Mr. Rochester was now at liberty.Left alone, I walked to the window; but nothing was to be seen thence:twilight and snowflakes together thickened the air, and hid the veryshrubs on the lawn. I let down the curtain and went back to thefireside.In the clear embers I was tracing a view, not unlike a picture Iremembered to have seen of the castle of Heidelberg, on the Rhine, whenMrs. Fairfax came in, breaking up by her entrance the fiery mosaic Ihad been piercing together, and scattering too some heavy unwelcomethoughts that were beginning to throng on my solitude.“Mr. Rochester would be glad if you and your pupil would take tea withhim in the drawing-room this evening,” said she: “he has been so muchengaged all day that he could not ask to see you before.”“When is his tea-time?” I inquired.“Oh, at six o’clock: he keeps early hours in the country. You hadbetter change your frock now; I will go with you and fasten it. Here isa candle.”“Is it necessary to change my frock?”“Yes, you had better: I always dress for the evening when Mr. Rochesteris here.”This additional ceremony seemed somewhat stately; however, I repairedto my room, and, with Mrs. Fairfax’s aid, replaced my black stuff dressby one of black silk; the best and the only additional one I had,except one of light grey, which, in my Lowood notions of the toilette,I thought too fine to be worn, except on first-rate occasions.“You want a brooch,” said Mrs. Fairfax. I had a single little pearlornament which Miss Temple gave me as a parting keepsake: I put it on,and then we went downstairs. Unused as I was to strangers, it wasrather a trial to appear thus formally summoned in Mr. Rochester’spresence. I let Mrs. Fairfax precede me into the dining-room, and keptin her shade as we crossed that apartment; and, passing the arch, whosecurtain was now dropped, entered the elegant recess beyond.Two wax candles stood lighted on the table, and two on the mantelpiece;basking in the light and heat of a superb fire, lay Pilot—Adèle kneltnear him. Half reclined on a couch appeared Mr. Rochester, his footsupported by the cushion; he was looking at Adèle and the dog: the fireshone full on his face. I knew my traveller with his broad and jettyeyebrows; his square forehead, made squarer by the horizontal sweep ofhis black hair. I recognised his decisive nose, more remarkable forcharacter than beauty; his full nostrils, denoting, I thought, choler;his grim mouth, chin, and jaw—yes, all three were very grim, and nomistake. His shape, now divested of cloak, I perceived harmonised insquareness with his physiognomy: I suppose it was a good figure in theathletic sense of the term—broad chested and thin flanked, thoughneither tall nor graceful.Mr. Rochester must have been aware of the entrance of Mrs. Fairfax andmyself; but it appeared he was not in the mood to notice us, for henever lifted his head as we approached.“Here is Miss Eyre, sir,” said Mrs. Fairfax, in her quiet way. Hebowed, still not taking his eyes from the group of the dog and child.“Let Miss Eyre be seated,” said he: and there was something in theforced stiff bow, in the impatient yet formal tone, which seemedfurther to express, “What the deuce is it to me whether Miss Eyre bethere or not? At this moment I am not disposed to accost her.”I sat down quite disembarrassed. A reception of finished politenesswould probably have confused me: I could not have returned or repaid itby answering grace and elegance on my part; but harsh caprice laid meunder no obligation; on the contrary, a decent quiescence, under thefreak of manner, gave me the advantage. Besides, the eccentricity ofthe proceeding was piquant: I felt interested to see how he would goon.He went on as a statue would, that is, he neither spoke nor moved. Mrs.Fairfax seemed to think it necessary that some one should be amiable,and she began to talk. Kindly, as usual—and, as usual, rather trite—shecondoled with him on the pressure of business he had had all day; onthe annoyance it must have been to him with that painful sprain: thenshe commended his patience and perseverance in going through with it.“Madam, I should like some tea,” was the sole rejoinder she got. Shehastened to ring the bell; and when the tray came, she proceeded toarrange the cups, spoons, &c., with assiduous celerity. I and Adèlewent to the table; but the master did not leave his couch.“Will you hand Mr. Rochester’s cup?” said Mrs. Fairfax to me; “Adèlemight perhaps spill it.”I did as requested. As he took the cup from my hand, Adèle, thinkingthe moment propitious for making a request in my favour, cried out—“N’est-ce pas, monsieur, qu’il y a un cadeau pour Mademoiselle Eyredans votre petit coffre?”“Who talks of cadeaux?” said he gruffly. “Did you expect a present,Miss Eyre? Are you fond of presents?” and he searched my face with eyesthat I saw were dark, irate, and piercing.“I hardly know, sir; I have little experience of them: they aregenerally thought pleasant things.”“Generally thought? But what do _you_ think?”“I should be obliged to take time, sir, before I could give you ananswer worthy of your acceptance: a present has many faces to it, hasit not? and one should consider all, before pronouncing an opinion asto its nature.”“Miss Eyre, you are not so unsophisticated as Adèle: she demands a‘cadeau,’ clamorously, the moment she sees me: you beat about thebush.”“Because I have less confidence in my deserts than Adèle has: she canprefer the claim of old acquaintance, and the right too of custom; forshe says you have always been in the habit of giving her playthings;but if I had to make out a case I should be puzzled, since I am astranger, and have done nothing to entitle me to an acknowledgment.”“Oh, don’t fall back on over-modesty! I have examined Adèle, and findyou have taken great pains with her: she is not bright, she has notalents; yet in a short time she has made much improvement.”“Sir, you have now given me my ‘cadeau;’ I am obliged to you: it is themeed teachers most covet—praise of their pupils’ progress.”“Humph!” said Mr. Rochester, and he took his tea in silence.“Come to the fire,” said the master, when the tray was taken away, andMrs. Fairfax had settled into a corner with her knitting; while Adèlewas leading me by the hand round the room, showing me the beautifulbooks and ornaments on the consoles and chiffonnières. We obeyed, as induty bound; Adèle wanted to take a seat on my knee, but she was orderedto amuse herself with Pilot.“You have been resident in my house three months?”“Yes, sir.”“And you came from—?”“From Lowood school, in ——shire.”“Ah! a charitable concern. How long were you there?”“Eight years.”“Eight years! you must be tenacious of life. I thought half the time insuch a place would have done up any constitution! No wonder you haverather the look of another world. I marvelled where you had got thatsort of face. When you came on me in Hay Lane last night, I thoughtunaccountably of fairy tales, and had half a mind to demand whether youhad bewitched my horse: I am not sure yet. Who are your parents?”“I have none.”“Nor ever had, I suppose: do you remember them?”“No.”“I thought not. And so you were waiting for your people when you sat onthat stile?”“For whom, sir?”“For the men in green: it was a proper moonlight evening for them. DidI break through one of your rings, that you spread that damned ice onthe causeway?”I shook my head. “The men in green all forsook England a hundred yearsago,” said I, speaking as seriously as he had done. “And not even inHay Lane, or the fields about it, could you find a trace of them. Idon’t think either summer or harvest, or winter moon, will ever shineon their revels more.”Mrs. Fairfax had dropped her knitting, and, with raised eyebrows,seemed wondering what sort of talk this was.“Well,” resumed Mr. Rochester, “if you disown parents, you must havesome sort of kinsfolk: uncles and aunts?”“No; none that I ever saw.”“And your home?”“I have none.”“Where do your brothers and sisters live?”“I have no brothers or sisters.”“Who recommended you to come here?”“I advertised, and Mrs. Fairfax answered my advertisement.”“Yes,” said the good lady, who now knew what ground we were upon, “andI am daily thankful for the choice Providence led me to make. Miss Eyrehas been an invaluable companion to me, and a kind and careful teacherto Adèle.”“Don’t trouble yourself to give her a character,” returned Mr.Rochester: “eulogiums will not bias me; I shall judge for myself. Shebegan by felling my horse.”“Sir?” said Mrs. Fairfax.“I have to thank her for this sprain.”The widow looked bewildered.“Miss Eyre, have you ever lived in a town?”“No, sir.”“Have you seen much society?”“None but the pupils and teachers of Lowood, and now the inmates ofThornfield.”“Have you read much?”“Only such books as came in my way; and they have not been numerous orvery learned.”“You have lived the life of a nun: no doubt you are well drilled inreligious forms;—Brocklehurst, who I understand directs Lowood, is aparson, is he not?”“Yes, sir.”“And you girls probably worshipped him, as a convent full ofreligieuses would worship their director.”“Oh, no.”“You are very cool! No! What! a novice not worship her priest! Thatsounds blasphemous.”“I disliked Mr. Brocklehurst; and I was not alone in the feeling. He isa harsh man; at once pompous and meddling; he cut off our hair; and foreconomy’s sake bought us bad needles and thread, with which we couldhardly sew.”“That was very false economy,” remarked Mrs. Fairfax, who now againcaught the drift of the dialogue.“And was that the head and front of his offending?” demanded Mr.Rochester.“He starved us when he had the sole superintendence of the provisiondepartment, before the committee was appointed; and he bored us withlong lectures once a week, and with evening readings from books of hisown inditing, about sudden deaths and judgments, which made us afraidto go to bed.”“What age were you when you went to Lowood?”“About ten.”“And you stayed there eight years: you are now, then, eighteen?”I assented.“Arithmetic, you see, is useful; without its aid, I should hardly havebeen able to guess your age. It is a point difficult to fix where thefeatures and countenance are so much at variance as in your case. Andnow what did you learn at Lowood? Can you play?”“A little.”“Of course: that is the established answer. Go into the library—I mean,if you please.—(Excuse my tone of command; I am used to say, ‘Do this,’and it is done: I cannot alter my customary habits for one newinmate.)—Go, then, into the library; take a candle with you; leave thedoor open; sit down to the piano, and play a tune.”I departed, obeying his directions.“Enough!” he called out in a few minutes. “You play _a little_, I see;like any other English school-girl; perhaps rather better than some,but not well.”I closed the piano and returned. Mr. Rochester continued—“Adèle showed me some sketches this morning, which she said were yours.I don’t know whether they were entirely of your doing; probably amaster aided you?”“No, indeed!” I interjected.“Ah! that pricks pride. Well, fetch me your portfolio, if you can vouchfor its contents being original; but don’t pass your word unless youare certain: I can recognise patchwork.”“Then I will say nothing, and you shall judge for yourself, sir.”I brought the portfolio from the library.“Approach the table,” said he; and I wheeled it to his couch. Adèle andMrs. Fairfax drew near to see the pictures.“No crowding,” said Mr. Rochester: “take the drawings from my hand as Ifinish with them; but don’t push your faces up to mine.”He deliberately scrutinised each sketch and painting. Three he laidaside; the others, when he had examined them, he swept from him.“Take them off to the other table, Mrs. Fairfax,” said he, “and look atthem with Adèle;—you” (glancing at me) “resume your seat, and answer myquestions. I perceive those pictures were done by one hand: was thathand yours?”“Yes.”“And when did you find time to do them? They have taken much time, andsome thought.”“I did them in the last two vacations I spent at Lowood, when I had noother occupation.”“Where did you get your copies?”“Out of my head.”“That head I see now on your shoulders?”“Yes, sir.”“Has it other furniture of the same kind within?”“I should think it may have: I should hope—better.”He spread the pictures before him, and again surveyed them alternately.While he is so occupied, I will tell you, reader, what they are: andfirst, I must premise that they are nothing wonderful. The subjectshad, indeed, risen vividly on my mind. As I saw them with the spiritualeye, before I attempted to embody them, they were striking; but my handwould not second my fancy, and in each case it had wrought out but apale portrait of the thing I had conceived.These pictures were in water-colours. The first represented clouds lowand livid, rolling over a swollen sea: all the distance was in eclipse;so, too, was the foreground; or rather, the nearest billows, for therewas no land. One gleam of light lifted into relief a half-submergedmast, on which sat a cormorant, dark and large, with wings flecked withfoam; its beak held a gold bracelet set with gems, that I had touchedwith as brilliant tints as my palette could yield, and as glitteringdistinctness as my pencil could impart. Sinking below the bird andmast, a drowned corpse glanced through the green water; a fair arm wasthe only limb clearly visible, whence the bracelet had been washed ortorn.The second picture contained for foreground only the dim peak of ahill, with grass and some leaves slanting as if by a breeze. Beyond andabove spread an expanse of sky, dark blue as at twilight: rising intothe sky was a woman’s shape to the bust, portrayed in tints as dusk andsoft as I could combine. The dim forehead was crowned with a star; thelineaments below were seen as through the suffusion of vapour; the eyesshone dark and wild; the hair streamed shadowy, like a beamless cloudtorn by storm or by electric travail. On the neck lay a pale reflectionlike moonlight; the same faint lustre touched the train of thin cloudsfrom which rose and bowed this vision of the Evening Star.The third showed the pinnacle of an iceberg piercing a polar wintersky: a muster of northern lights reared their dim lances, closeserried, along the horizon. Throwing these into distance, rose, in theforeground, a head,—a colossal head, inclined towards the iceberg, andresting against it. Two thin hands, joined under the forehead, andsupporting it, drew up before the lower features a sable veil; a browquite bloodless, white as bone, and an eye hollow and fixed, blank ofmeaning but for the glassiness of despair, alone were visible. Abovethe temples, amidst wreathed turban folds of black drapery, vague inits character and consistency as cloud, gleamed a ring of white flame,gemmed with sparkles of a more lurid tinge. This pale crescent was “thelikeness of a kingly crown;” what it diademed was “the shape whichshape had none.”“Were you happy when you painted these pictures?” asked Mr. Rochesterpresently.“I was absorbed, sir: yes, and I was happy. To paint them, in short,was to enjoy one of the keenest pleasures I have ever known.”“That is not saying much. Your pleasures, by your own account, havebeen few; but I daresay you did exist in a kind of artist’s dreamlandwhile you blent and arranged these strange tints. Did you sit at themlong each day?”“I had nothing else to do, because it was the vacation, and I sat atthem from morning till noon, and from noon till night: the length ofthe midsummer days favoured my inclination to apply.”“And you felt self-satisfied with the result of your ardent labours?”“Far from it. I was tormented by the contrast between my idea and myhandiwork: in each case I had imagined something which I was quitepowerless to realise.”“Not quite: you have secured the shadow of your thought; but no more,probably. You had not enough of the artist’s skill and science to giveit full being: yet the drawings are, for a school-girl, peculiar. As tothe thoughts, they are elfish. These eyes in the Evening Star you musthave seen in a dream. How could you make them look so clear, and yetnot at all brilliant? for the planet above quells their rays. And whatmeaning is that in their solemn depth? And who taught you to paintwind? There is a high gale in that sky, and on this hill-top. Where didyou see Latmos? For that is Latmos. There! put the drawings away!”I had scarce tied the strings of the portfolio, when, looking at hiswatch, he said abruptly—“It is nine o’clock: what are you about, Miss Eyre, to let Adèle sit upso long? Take her to bed.”Adèle went to kiss him before quitting the room: he endured the caress,but scarcely seemed to relish it more than Pilot would have done, norso much.“I wish you all good-night, now,” said he, making a movement of thehand towards the door, in token that he was tired of our company, andwished to dismiss us. Mrs. Fairfax folded up her knitting: I took myportfolio: we curtseyed to him, received a frigid bow in return, and sowithdrew.“You said Mr. Rochester was not strikingly peculiar, Mrs. Fairfax,” Iobserved, when I rejoined her in her room, after putting Adèle to bed.“Well, is he?”“I think so: he is very changeful and abrupt.”“True: no doubt he may appear so to a stranger, but I am so accustomedto his manner, I never think of it; and then, if he has peculiaritiesof temper, allowance should be made.”“Why?”“Partly because it is his nature—and we can none of us help our nature;and partly because he has painful thoughts, no doubt, to harass him,and make his spirits unequal.”“What about?”“Family troubles, for one thing.”“But he has no family.”“Not now, but he has had—or, at least, relatives. He lost his elderbrother a few years since.”“His _elder_ brother?”“Yes. The present Mr. Rochester has not been very long in possession ofthe property; only about nine years.”“Nine years is a tolerable time. Was he so very fond of his brother asto be still inconsolable for his loss?”“Why, no—perhaps not. I believe there were some misunderstandingsbetween them. Mr. Rowland Rochester was not quite just to Mr. Edward;and perhaps he prejudiced his father against him. The old gentleman wasfond of money, and anxious to keep the family estate together. He didnot like to diminish the property by division, and yet he was anxiousthat Mr. Edward should have wealth, too, to keep up the consequence ofthe name; and, soon after he was of age, some steps were taken thatwere not quite fair, and made a great deal of mischief. Old Mr.Rochester and Mr. Rowland combined to bring Mr. Edward into what heconsidered a painful position, for the sake of making his fortune: whatthe precise nature of that position was I never clearly knew, but hisspirit could not brook what he had to suffer in it. He is not veryforgiving: he broke with his family, and now for many years he has ledan unsettled kind of life. I don’t think he has ever been resident atThornfield for a fortnight together, since the death of his brotherwithout a will left him master of the estate; and, indeed, no wonder heshuns the old place.”“Why should he shun it?”“Perhaps he thinks it gloomy.”The answer was evasive. I should have liked something clearer; but Mrs.Fairfax either could not, or would not, give me more explicitinformation of the origin and nature of Mr. Rochester’s trials. Sheaverred they were a mystery to herself, and that what she knew waschiefly from conjecture. It was evident, indeed, that she wished me todrop the subject, which I did accordingly.CHAPTER XIVFor several subsequent days I saw little of Mr. Rochester. In themornings he seemed much engaged with business, and, in the afternoon,gentlemen from Millcote or the neighbourhood called, and sometimesstayed to dine with him. When his sprain was well enough to admit ofhorse exercise, he rode out a good deal; probably to return thesevisits, as he generally did not come back till late at night.During this interval, even Adèle was seldom sent for to his presence,and all my acquaintance with him was confined to an occasionalrencontre in the hall, on the stairs, or in the gallery, when he wouldsometimes pass me haughtily and coldly, just acknowledging my presenceby a distant nod or a cool glance, and sometimes bow and smile withgentlemanlike affability. His changes of mood did not offend me,because I saw that I had nothing to do with their alternation; the ebband flow depended on causes quite disconnected with me.One day he had had company to dinner, and had sent for my portfolio; inorder, doubtless, to exhibit its contents: the gentlemen went awayearly, to attend a public meeting at Millcote, as Mrs. Fairfax informedme; but the night being wet and inclement, Mr. Rochester did notaccompany them. Soon after they were gone he rang the bell: a messagecame that I and Adèle were to go downstairs. I brushed Adèle’s hair andmade her neat, and having ascertained that I was myself in my usualQuaker trim, where there was nothing to retouch—all being too close andplain, braided locks included, to admit of disarrangement—we descended,Adèle wondering whether the _petit coffre_ was at length come; for,owing to some mistake, its arrival had hitherto been delayed. She wasgratified: there it stood, a little carton, on the table when weentered the dining-room. She appeared to know it by instinct.“Ma boite! ma boite!” exclaimed she, running towards it.“Yes, there is your ‘boite’ at last: take it into a corner, you genuinedaughter of Paris, and amuse yourself with disembowelling it,” said thedeep and rather sarcastic voice of Mr. Rochester, proceeding from thedepths of an immense easy-chair at the fireside. “And mind,” hecontinued, “don’t bother me with any details of the anatomical process,or any notice of the condition of the entrails: let your operation beconducted in silence: tiens-toi tranquille, enfant; comprends-tu?”Adèle seemed scarcely to need the warning; she had already retired to asofa with her treasure, and was busy untying the cord which secured thelid. Having removed this impediment, and lifted certain silveryenvelopes of tissue paper, she merely exclaimed—“Oh ciel! Que c’est beau!” and then remained absorbed in ecstaticcontemplation.“Is Miss Eyre there?” now demanded the master, half rising from hisseat to look round to the door, near which I still stood.“Ah! well, come forward; be seated here.” He drew a chair near his own.“I am not fond of the prattle of children,” he continued; “for, oldbachelor as I am, I have no pleasant associations connected with theirlisp. It would be intolerable to me to pass a whole evening_tête-à-tête_ with a brat. Don’t draw that chair farther off, MissEyre; sit down exactly where I placed it—if you please, that is.Confound these civilities! I continually forget them. Nor do Iparticularly affect simple-minded old ladies. By-the-bye, I must havemine in mind; it won’t do to neglect her; she is a Fairfax, or wed toone; and blood is said to be thicker than water.”He rang, and despatched an invitation to Mrs. Fairfax, who soonarrived, knitting-basket in hand.“Good evening, madam; I sent to you for a charitable purpose. I haveforbidden Adèle to talk to me about her presents, and she is burstingwith repletion; have the goodness to serve her as auditress andinterlocutrice; it will be one of the most benevolent acts you everperformed.”Adèle, indeed, no sooner saw Mrs. Fairfax, than she summoned her to hersofa, and there quickly filled her lap with the porcelain, the ivory,the waxen contents of her “boite;” pouring out, meantime, explanationsand raptures in such broken English as she was mistress of.“Now I have performed the part of a good host,” pursued Mr. Rochester,“put my guests into the way of amusing each other, I ought to be atliberty to attend to my own pleasure. Miss Eyre, draw your chair stilla little farther forward: you are yet too far back; I cannot see youwithout disturbing my position in this comfortable chair, which I haveno mind to do.”I did as I was bid, though I would much rather have remained somewhatin the shade; but Mr. Rochester had such a direct way of giving orders,it seemed a matter of course to obey him promptly.We were, as I have said, in the dining-room: the lustre, which had beenlit for dinner, filled the room with a festal breadth of light; thelarge fire was all red and clear; the purple curtains hung rich andample before the lofty window and loftier arch; everything was still,save the subdued chat of Adèle (she dared not speak loud), and, fillingup each pause, the beating of winter rain against the panes.Mr. Rochester, as he sat in his damask-covered chair, looked differentto what I had seen him look before; not quite so stern—much lessgloomy. There was a smile on his lips, and his eyes sparkled, whetherwith wine or not, I am not sure; but I think it very probable. He was,in short, in his after-dinner mood; more expanded and genial, and alsomore self-indulgent than the frigid and rigid temper of the morning;still he looked preciously grim, cushioning his massive head againstthe swelling back of his chair, and receiving the light of the fire onhis granite-hewn features, and in his great, dark eyes; for he hadgreat, dark eyes, and very fine eyes, too—not without a certain changein their depths sometimes, which, if it was not softness, reminded you,at least, of that feeling.He had been looking two minutes at the fire, and I had been looking thesame length of time at him, when, turning suddenly, he caught my gazefastened on his physiognomy.“You examine me, Miss Eyre,” said he: “do you think me handsome?”I should, if I had deliberated, have replied to this question bysomething conventionally vague and polite; but the answer somehowslipped from my tongue before I was aware—“No, sir.”“Ah! By my word! there is something singular about you,” said he: “youhave the air of a little _nonnette_; quaint, quiet, grave, and simple,as you sit with your hands before you, and your eyes generally bent onthe carpet (except, by-the-bye, when they are directed piercingly to myface; as just now, for instance); and when one asks you a question, ormakes a remark to which you are obliged to reply, you rap out a roundrejoinder, which, if not blunt, is at least brusque. What do you meanby it?”“Sir, I was too plain; I beg your pardon. I ought to have replied thatit was not easy to give an impromptu answer to a question aboutappearances; that tastes mostly differ; and that beauty is of littleconsequence, or something of that sort.”“You ought to have replied no such thing. Beauty of little consequence,indeed! And so, under pretence of softening the previous outrage, ofstroking and soothing me into placidity, you stick a sly penknife undermy ear! Go on: what fault do you find with me, pray? I suppose I haveall my limbs and all my features like any other man?”“Mr. Rochester, allow me to disown my first answer: I intended nopointed repartee: it was only a blunder.”“Just so: I think so: and you shall be answerable for it. Criticise me:does my forehead not please you?”He lifted up the sable waves of hair which lay horizontally over hisbrow, and showed a solid enough mass of intellectual organs, but anabrupt deficiency where the suave sign of benevolence should haverisen.“Now, ma’am, am I a fool?”“Far from it, sir. You would, perhaps, think me rude if I inquired inreturn whether you are a philanthropist?”“There again! Another stick of the penknife, when she pretended to patmy head: and that is because I said I did not like the society ofchildren and old women (low be it spoken!). No, young lady, I am not ageneral philanthropist; but I bear a conscience;” and he pointed to theprominences which are said to indicate that faculty, and which,fortunately for him, were sufficiently conspicuous; giving, indeed, amarked breadth to the upper part of his head: “and, besides, I once hada kind of rude tenderness of heart. When I was as old as you, I was afeeling fellow enough; partial to the unfledged, unfostered, andunlucky; but Fortune has knocked me about since: she has even kneadedme with her knuckles, and now I flatter myself I am hard and tough asan India-rubber ball; pervious, though, through a chink or two still,and with one sentient point in the middle of the lump. Yes: does thatleave hope for me?”“Hope of what, sir?”“Of my final re-transformation from India-rubber back to flesh?”“Decidedly he has had too much wine,” I thought; and I did not knowwhat answer to make to his queer question: how could I tell whether hewas capable of being re-transformed?“You looked very much puzzled, Miss Eyre; and though you are not prettyany more than I am handsome, yet a puzzled air becomes you; besides, itis convenient, for it keeps those searching eyes of yours away from myphysiognomy, and busies them with the worsted flowers of the rug; sopuzzle on. Young lady, I am disposed to be gregarious and communicativeto-night.”With this announcement he rose from his chair, and stood, leaning hisarm on the marble mantelpiece: in that attitude his shape was seenplainly as well as his face; his unusual breadth of chest,disproportionate almost to his length of limb. I am sure most peoplewould have thought him an ugly man; yet there was so much unconsciouspride in his port; so much ease in his demeanour; such a look ofcomplete indifference to his own external appearance; so haughty areliance on the power of other qualities, intrinsic or adventitious, toatone for the lack of mere personal attractiveness, that, in looking athim, one inevitably shared the indifference, and, even in a blind,imperfect sense, put faith in the confidence.“I am disposed to be gregarious and communicative to-night,” herepeated, “and that is why I sent for you: the fire and the chandelierwere not sufficient company for me; nor would Pilot have been, for noneof these can talk. Adèle is a degree better, but still far below themark; Mrs. Fairfax ditto; you, I am persuaded, can suit me if you will:you puzzled me the first evening I invited you down here. I have almostforgotten you since: other ideas have driven yours from my head; butto-night I am resolved to be at ease; to dismiss what importunes, andrecall what pleases. It would please me now to draw you out—to learnmore of you—therefore speak.”Instead of speaking, I smiled; and not a very complacent or submissivesmile either.“Speak,” he urged.“What about, sir?”“Whatever you like. I leave both the choice of subject and the mannerof treating it entirely to yourself.”Accordingly I sat and said nothing: “If he expects me to talk for themere sake of talking and showing off, he will find he has addressedhimself to the wrong person,” I thought.“You are dumb, Miss Eyre.”I was dumb still. He bent his head a little towards me, and with asingle hasty glance seemed to dive into my eyes.“Stubborn?” he said, “and annoyed. Ah! it is consistent. I put myrequest in an absurd, almost insolent form. Miss Eyre, I beg yourpardon. The fact is, once for all, I don’t wish to treat you like aninferior: that is” (correcting himself), “I claim only such superiorityas must result from twenty years’ difference in age and a century’sadvance in experience. This is legitimate, _et j’y tiens_, as Adèlewould say; and it is by virtue of this superiority, and this alone,that I desire you to have the goodness to talk to me a little now, anddivert my thoughts, which are galled with dwelling on onepoint—cankering as a rusty nail.”He had deigned an explanation, almost an apology, and I did not feelinsensible to his condescension, and would not seem so.“I am willing to amuse you, if I can, sir—quite willing; but I cannotintroduce a topic, because how do I know what will interest you? Ask mequestions, and I will do my best to answer them.”“Then, in the first place, do you agree with me that I have a right tobe a little masterful, abrupt, perhaps exacting, sometimes, on thegrounds I stated, namely, that I am old enough to be your father, andthat I have battled through a varied experience with many men of manynations, and roamed over half the globe, while you have lived quietlywith one set of people in one house?”“Do as you please, sir.”“That is no answer; or rather it is a very irritating, because a veryevasive one. Reply clearly.”“I don’t think, sir, you have a right to command me, merely because youare older than I, or because you have seen more of the world than Ihave; your claim to superiority depends on the use you have made ofyour time and experience.”“Humph! Promptly spoken. But I won’t allow that, seeing that it wouldnever suit my case, as I have made an indifferent, not to say a bad,use of both advantages. Leaving superiority out of the question, then,you must still agree to receive my orders now and then, without beingpiqued or hurt by the tone of command. Will you?”I smiled: I thought to myself Mr. Rochester _is_ peculiar—he seems toforget that he pays me £30 per annum for receiving his orders.“The smile is very well,” said he, catching instantly the passingexpression; “but speak too.”“I was thinking, sir, that very few masters would trouble themselves toinquire whether or not their paid subordinates were piqued and hurt bytheir orders.”“Paid subordinates! What! you are my paid subordinate, are you? Oh yes,I had forgotten the salary! Well then, on that mercenary ground, willyou agree to let me hector a little?”“No, sir, not on that ground; but, on the ground that you did forgetit, and that you care whether or not a dependent is comfortable in hisdependency, I agree heartily.”“And will you consent to dispense with a great many conventional formsand phrases, without thinking that the omission arises from insolence?”“I am sure, sir, I should never mistake informality for insolence: oneI rather like, the other nothing free-born would submit to, even for asalary.”“Humbug! Most things free-born will submit to anything for a salary;therefore, keep to yourself, and don’t venture on generalities of whichyou are intensely ignorant. However, I mentally shake hands with youfor your answer, despite its inaccuracy; and as much for the manner inwhich it was said, as for the substance of the speech; the manner wasfrank and sincere; one does not often see such a manner: no, on thecontrary, affectation, or coldness, or stupid, coarse-mindedmisapprehension of one’s meaning are the usual rewards of candour. Notthree in three thousand raw school-girl-governesses would have answeredme as you have just done. But I don’t mean to flatter you: if you arecast in a different mould to the majority, it is no merit of yours:Nature did it. And then, after all, I go too fast in my conclusions:for what I yet know, you may be no better than the rest; you may haveintolerable defects to counterbalance your few good points.”“And so may you,” I thought. My eye met his as the idea crossed mymind: he seemed to read the glance, answering as if its import had beenspoken as well as imagined—“Yes, yes, you are right,” said he; “I have plenty of faults of my own:I know it, and I don’t wish to palliate them, I assure you. God wot Ineed not be too severe about others; I have a past existence, a seriesof deeds, a colour of life to contemplate within my own breast, whichmight well call my sneers and censures from my neighbours to myself. Istarted, or rather (for like other defaulters, I like to lay half theblame on ill fortune and adverse circumstances) was thrust on to awrong tack at the age of one-and-twenty, and have never recovered theright course since: but I might have been very different; I might havebeen as good as you—wiser—almost as stainless. I envy you your peace ofmind, your clean conscience, your unpolluted memory. Little girl, amemory without blot or contamination must be an exquisite treasure—aninexhaustible source of pure refreshment: is it not?”“How was your memory when you were eighteen, sir?”“All right then; limpid, salubrious: no gush of bilge water had turnedit to fetid puddle. I was your equal at eighteen—quite your equal.Nature meant me to be, on the whole, a good man, Miss Eyre; one of thebetter kind, and you see I am not so. You would say you don’t see it;at least I flatter myself I read as much in your eye (beware,by-the-bye, what you express with that organ; I am quick atinterpreting its language). Then take my word for it,—I am not avillain: you are not to suppose that—not to attribute to me any suchbad eminence; but, owing, I verily believe, rather to circumstancesthan to my natural bent, I am a trite commonplace sinner, hackneyed inall the poor petty dissipations with which the rich and worthless tryto put on life. Do you wonder that I avow this to you? Know, that inthe course of your future life you will often find yourself elected theinvoluntary confidant of your acquaintances’ secrets: people willinstinctively find out, as I have done, that it is not your forte totell of yourself, but to listen while others talk of themselves; theywill feel, too, that you listen with no malevolent scorn of theirindiscretion, but with a kind of innate sympathy; not the lesscomforting and encouraging because it is very unobtrusive in itsmanifestations.”“How do you know?—how can you guess all this, sir?”“I know it well; therefore I proceed almost as freely as if I werewriting my thoughts in a diary. You would say, I should have beensuperior to circumstances; so I should—so I should; but you see I wasnot. When fate wronged me, I had not the wisdom to remain cool: Iturned desperate; then I degenerated. Now, when any vicious simpletonexcites my disgust by his paltry ribaldry, I cannot flatter myself thatI am better than he: I am forced to confess that he and I are on alevel. I wish I had stood firm—God knows I do! Dread remorse when youare tempted to err, Miss Eyre; remorse is the poison of life.”“Repentance is said to be its cure, sir.”“It is not its cure. Reformation may be its cure; and I could reform—Ihave strength yet for that—if—but where is the use of thinking of it,hampered, burdened, cursed as I am? Besides, since happiness isirrevocably denied me, I have a right to get pleasure out of life: andI _will_ get it, cost what it may.”“Then you will degenerate still more, sir.”“Possibly: yet why should I, if I can get sweet, fresh pleasure? And Imay get it as sweet and fresh as the wild honey the bee gathers on themoor.”“It will sting—it will taste bitter, sir.”“How do you know?—you never tried it. How very serious—how very solemnyou look: and you are as ignorant of the matter as this cameo head”(taking one from the mantelpiece). “You have no right to preach to me,you neophyte, that have not passed the porch of life, and areabsolutely unacquainted with its mysteries.”“I only remind you of your own words, sir: you said error broughtremorse, and you pronounced remorse the poison of existence.”“And who talks of error now? I scarcely think the notion that flitteredacross my brain was an error. I believe it was an inspiration ratherthan a temptation: it was very genial, very soothing—I know that. Hereit comes again! It is no devil, I assure you; or if it be, it has puton the robes of an angel of light. I think I must admit so fair a guestwhen it asks entrance to my heart.”“Distrust it, sir; it is not a true angel.”“Once more, how do you know? By what instinct do you pretend todistinguish between a fallen seraph of the abyss and a messenger fromthe eternal throne—between a guide and a seducer?”“I judged by your countenance, sir, which was troubled when you saidthe suggestion had returned upon you. I feel sure it will work you moremisery if you listen to it.”“Not at all—it bears the most gracious message in the world: for therest, you are not my conscience-keeper, so don’t make yourself uneasy.Here, come in, bonny wanderer!”He said this as if he spoke to a vision, viewless to any eye but hisown; then, folding his arms, which he had half extended, on his chest,he seemed to enclose in their embrace the invisible being.“Now,” he continued, again addressing me, “I have received thepilgrim—a disguised deity, as I verily believe. Already it has done megood: my heart was a sort of charnel; it will now be a shrine.”“To speak truth, sir, I don’t understand you at all: I cannot keep upthe conversation, because it has got out of my depth. Only one thing, Iknow: you said you were not as good as you should like to be, and thatyou regretted your own imperfection;—one thing I can comprehend: youintimated that to have a sullied memory was a perpetual bane. It seemsto me, that if you tried hard, you would in time find it possible tobecome what you yourself would approve; and that if from this day youbegan with resolution to correct your thoughts and actions, you wouldin a few years have laid up a new and stainless store of recollections,to which you might revert with pleasure.”“Justly thought; rightly said, Miss Eyre; and, at this moment, I ampaving hell with energy.”“Sir?”“I am laying down good intentions, which I believe durable as flint.Certainly, my associates and pursuits shall be other than they havebeen.”“And better?”“And better—so much better as pure ore is than foul dross. You seem todoubt me; I don’t doubt myself: I know what my aim is, what my motivesare; and at this moment I pass a law, unalterable as that of the Medesand Persians, that both are right.”“They cannot be, sir, if they require a new statute to legalise them.”“They are, Miss Eyre, though they absolutely require a new statute:unheard-of combinations of circumstances demand unheard-of rules.”“That sounds a dangerous maxim, sir; because one can see at once thatit is liable to abuse.”“Sententious sage! so it is: but I swear by my household gods not toabuse it.”“You are human and fallible.”“I am: so are you—what then?”“The human and fallible should not arrogate a power with which thedivine and perfect alone can be safely intrusted.”“What power?”“That of saying of any strange, unsanctioned line of action,—‘Let it beright.’”“‘Let it be right’—the very words: you have pronounced them.”“_May_ it be right then,” I said, as I rose, deeming it useless tocontinue a discourse which was all darkness to me; and, besides,sensible that the character of my interlocutor was beyond mypenetration; at least, beyond its present reach; and feeling theuncertainty, the vague sense of insecurity, which accompanies aconviction of ignorance.“Where are you going?”“To put Adèle to bed: it is past her bedtime.”“You are afraid of me, because I talk like a Sphynx.”“Your language is enigmatical, sir: but though I am bewildered, I amcertainly not afraid.”“You _are_ afraid—your self-love dreads a blunder.”“In that sense I do feel apprehensive—I have no wish to talk nonsense.”“If you did, it would be in such a grave, quiet manner, I shouldmistake it for sense. Do you never laugh, Miss Eyre? Don’t troubleyourself to answer—I see you laugh rarely; but you can laugh verymerrily: believe me, you are not naturally austere, any more than I amnaturally vicious. The Lowood constraint still clings to you somewhat;controlling your features, muffling your voice, and restricting yourlimbs; and you fear in the presence of a man and a brother—or father,or master, or what you will—to smile too gaily, speak too freely, ormove too quickly: but, in time, I think you will learn to be naturalwith me, as I find it impossible to be conventional with you; and thenyour looks and movements will have more vivacity and variety than theydare offer now. I see at intervals the glance of a curious sort of birdthrough the close-set bars of a cage: a vivid, restless, resolutecaptive is there; were it but free, it would soar cloud-high. You arestill bent on going?”“It has struck nine, sir.”“Never mind,—wait a minute: Adèle is not ready to go to bed yet. Myposition, Miss Eyre, with my back to the fire, and my face to the room,favours observation. While talking to you, I have also occasionallywatched Adèle (I have my own reasons for thinking her a curiousstudy,—reasons that I may, nay, that I shall, impart to you some day).She pulled out of her box, about ten minutes ago, a little pink silkfrock; rapture lit her face as she unfolded it; coquetry runs in herblood, blends with her brains, and seasons the marrow of her bones. ‘Ilfaut que je l’essaie!’ cried she, ‘et à l’instant même!’ and she rushedout of the room. She is now with Sophie, undergoing a robing process:in a few minutes she will re-enter; and I know what I shall see,—aminiature of Céline Varens, as she used to appear on the boards at therising of—But never mind that. However, my tenderest feelings are aboutto receive a shock: such is my presentiment; stay now, to see whetherit will be realised.”Ere long, Adèle’s little foot was heard tripping across the hall. Sheentered, transformed as her guardian had predicted. A dress ofrose-coloured satin, very short, and as full in the skirt as it couldbe gathered, replaced the brown frock she had previously worn; a wreathof rosebuds circled her forehead; her feet were dressed in silkstockings and small white satin sandals.“Est-ce que ma robe va bien?” cried she, bounding forwards; “et messouliers? et mes bas? Tenez, je crois que je vais danser!”And spreading out her dress, she chasséed across the room till, havingreached Mr. Rochester, she wheeled lightly round before him on tip-toe,then dropped on one knee at his feet, exclaiming—“Monsieur, je vous remercie mille fois de votre bonté;” then rising,she added, “C’est comme cela que maman faisait, n’est-ce pas,monsieur?”“Pre-cise-ly!” was the answer; “and, ‘comme cela,’ she charmed myEnglish gold out of my British breeches’ pocket. I have been green,too, Miss Eyre,—ay, grass green: not a more vernal tint freshens younow than once freshened me. My Spring is gone, however, but it has leftme that French floweret on my hands, which, in some moods, I would fainbe rid of. Not valuing now the root whence it sprang; having found thatit was of a sort which nothing but gold dust could manure, I have buthalf a liking to the blossom, especially when it looks so artificial asjust now. I keep it and rear it rather on the Roman Catholic principleof expiating numerous sins, great or small, by one good work. I’llexplain all this some day. Good-night.”CHAPTER XVMr. Rochester did, on a future occasion, explain it. It was oneafternoon, when he chanced to meet me and Adèle in the grounds: andwhile she played with Pilot and her shuttlecock, he asked me to walk upand down a long beech avenue within sight of her.He then said that she was the daughter of a French opera-dancer, CélineVarens, towards whom he had once cherished what he called a “_grandepassion_.” This passion Céline had professed to return with evensuperior ardour. He thought himself her idol, ugly as he was: hebelieved, as he said, that she preferred his “_taille d’athlète_” tothe elegance of the Apollo Belvidere.“And, Miss Eyre, so much was I flattered by this preference of theGallic sylph for her British gnome, that I installed her in an hotel;gave her a complete establishment of servants, a carriage, cashmeres,diamonds, dentelles, &c. In short, I began the process of ruiningmyself in the received style, like any other spoony. I had not, itseems, the originality to chalk out a new road to shame anddestruction, but trode the old track with stupid exactness not todeviate an inch from the beaten centre. I had—as I deserved to have—thefate of all other spoonies. Happening to call one evening when Célinedid not expect me, I found her out; but it was a warm night, and I wastired with strolling through Paris, so I sat down in her boudoir; happyto breathe the air consecrated so lately by her presence. No,—Iexaggerate; I never thought there was any consecrating virtue abouther: it was rather a sort of pastille perfume she had left; a scent ofmusk and amber, than an odour of sanctity. I was just beginning tostifle with the fumes of conservatory flowers and sprinkled essences,when I bethought myself to open the window and step out on to thebalcony. It was moonlight and gaslight besides, and very still andserene. The balcony was furnished with a chair or two; I sat down, andtook out a cigar,—I will take one now, if you will excuse me.”Here ensued a pause, filled up by the producing and lighting of acigar; having placed it to his lips and breathed a trail of Havannahincense on the freezing and sunless air, he went on—“I liked bonbons too in those days, Miss Eyre, and I was_croquant_—(overlook the barbarism)—_croquant_ chocolate comfits, andsmoking alternately, watching meantime the equipages that rolled alongthe fashionable streets towards the neighbouring opera-house, when inan elegant close carriage drawn by a beautiful pair of English horses,and distinctly seen in the brilliant city-night, I recognised the‘voiture’ I had given Céline. She was returning: of course my heartthumped with impatience against the iron rails I leant upon. Thecarriage stopped, as I had expected, at the hotel door; my flame (thatis the very word for an opera inamorata) alighted: though muffed in acloak—an unnecessary encumbrance, by-the-bye, on so warm a Juneevening—I knew her instantly by her little foot, seen peeping from theskirt of her dress, as she skipped from the carriage-step. Bending overthe balcony, I was about to murmur ‘Mon ange’—in a tone, of course,which should be audible to the ear of love alone—when a figure jumpedfrom the carriage after her; cloaked also; but that was a spurred heelwhich had rung on the pavement, and that was a hatted head which nowpassed under the arched _porte cochère_ of the hotel.“You never felt jealousy, did you, Miss Eyre? Of course not: I need notask you; because you never felt love. You have both sentiments yet toexperience: your soul sleeps; the shock is yet to be given which shallwaken it. You think all existence lapses in as quiet a flow as that inwhich your youth has hitherto slid away. Floating on with closed eyesand muffled ears, you neither see the rocks bristling not far off inthe bed of the flood, nor hear the breakers boil at their base. But Itell you—and you may mark my words—you will come some day to a craggypass in the channel, where the whole of life’s stream will be broken upinto whirl and tumult, foam and noise: either you will be dashed toatoms on crag points, or lifted up and borne on by some master-waveinto a calmer current—as I am now.“I like this day; I like that sky of steel; I like the sternness andstillness of the world under this frost. I like Thornfield, itsantiquity, its retirement, its old crow-trees and thorn-trees, its greyfaçade, and lines of dark windows reflecting that metal welkin: and yethow long have I abhorred the very thought of it, shunned it like agreat plague-house? How I do still abhor—”He ground his teeth and was silent: he arrested his step and struck hisboot against the hard ground. Some hated thought seemed to have him inits grip, and to hold him so tightly that he could not advance.We were ascending the avenue when he thus paused; the hall was beforeus. Lifting his eye to its battlements, he cast over them a glare suchas I never saw before or since. Pain, shame, ire, impatience, disgust,detestation, seemed momentarily to hold a quivering conflict in thelarge pupil dilating under his ebon eyebrow. Wild was the wrestle whichshould be paramount; but another feeling rose and triumphed: somethinghard and cynical: self-willed and resolute: it settled his passion andpetrified his countenance: he went on—“During the moment I was silent, Miss Eyre, I was arranging a pointwith my destiny. She stood there, by that beech-trunk—a hag like one ofthose who appeared to Macbeth on the heath of Forres. ‘You likeThornfield?’ she said, lifting her finger; and then she wrote in theair a memento, which ran in lurid hieroglyphics all along thehouse-front, between the upper and lower row of windows, ‘Like it ifyou can! Like it if you dare!’“‘I will like it,’ said I; ‘I dare like it;’ and” (he subjoinedmoodily) “I will keep my word; I will break obstacles to happiness, togoodness—yes, goodness. I wish to be a better man than I have been,than I am; as Job’s leviathan broke the spear, the dart, and thehabergeon, hindrances which others count as iron and brass, I willesteem but straw and rotten wood.”Adèle here ran before him with her shuttlecock. “Away!” he criedharshly; “keep at a distance, child; or go in to Sophie!” Continuingthen to pursue his walk in silence, I ventured to recall him to thepoint whence he had abruptly diverged—“Did you leave the balcony, sir,” I asked, “when Mdlle. Varensentered?”I almost expected a rebuff for this hardly well-timed question, but, onthe contrary, waking out of his scowling abstraction, he turned hiseyes towards me, and the shade seemed to clear off his brow. “Oh, I hadforgotten Céline! Well, to resume. When I saw my charmer thus come inaccompanied by a cavalier, I seemed to hear a hiss, and the green snakeof jealousy, rising on undulating coils from the moonlit balcony,glided within my waistcoat, and ate its way in two minutes to myheart’s core. Strange!” he exclaimed, suddenly starting again from thepoint. “Strange that I should choose you for the confidant of all this,young lady; passing strange that you should listen to me quietly, as ifit were the most usual thing in the world for a man like me to tellstories of his opera-mistresses to a quaint, inexperienced girl likeyou! But the last singularity explains the first, as I intimated oncebefore: you, with your gravity, considerateness, and caution were madeto be the recipient of secrets. Besides, I know what sort of a mind Ihave placed in communication with my own: I know it is one not liableto take infection: it is a peculiar mind: it is a unique one. Happily Ido not mean to harm it: but, if I did, it would not take harm from me.The more you and I converse, the better; for while I cannot blight you,you may refresh me.” After this digression he proceeded—“I remained in the balcony. ‘They will come to her boudoir, no doubt,’thought I: ‘let me prepare an ambush.’ So putting my hand in throughthe open window, I drew the curtain over it, leaving only an openingthrough which I could take observations; then I closed the casement,all but a chink just wide enough to furnish an outlet to lovers’whispered vows: then I stole back to my chair; and as I resumed it thepair came in. My eye was quickly at the aperture. Céline’s chamber-maidentered, lit a lamp, left it on the table, and withdrew. The couplewere thus revealed to me clearly: both removed their cloaks, and therewas ‘the Varens,’ shining in satin and jewels,—my gifts of course,—andthere was her companion in an officer’s uniform; and I knew him for ayoung roué of a vicomte—a brainless and vicious youth whom I hadsometimes met in society, and had never thought of hating because Idespised him so absolutely. On recognising him, the fang of the snakeJealousy was instantly broken; because at the same moment my love forCéline sank under an extinguisher. A woman who could betray me for sucha rival was not worth contending for; she deserved only scorn; less,however, than I, who had been her dupe.“They began to talk; their conversation eased me completely: frivolous,mercenary, heartless, and senseless, it was rather calculated to wearythan enrage a listener. A card of mine lay on the table; this beingperceived, brought my name under discussion. Neither of them possessedenergy or wit to belabour me soundly, but they insulted me as coarselyas they could in their little way: especially Céline, who even waxedrather brilliant on my personal defects—deformities she termed them.Now it had been her custom to launch out into fervent admiration ofwhat she called my ‘_beauté mâle_:’ wherein she differed diametricallyfrom you, who told me point-blank, at the second interview, that youdid not think me handsome. The contrast struck me at the time and—”Adèle here came running up again.“Monsieur, John has just been to say that your agent has called andwishes to see you.”“Ah! in that case I must abridge. Opening the window, I walked in uponthem; liberated Céline from my protection; gave her notice to vacateher hotel; offered her a purse for immediate exigencies; disregardedscreams, hysterics, prayers, protestations, convulsions; made anappointment with the vicomte for a meeting at the Bois de Boulogne.Next morning I had the pleasure of encountering him; left a bullet inone of his poor etiolated arms, feeble as the wing of a chicken in thepip, and then thought I had done with the whole crew. But unluckily theVarens, six months before, had given me this filette Adèle, who, sheaffirmed, was my daughter; and perhaps she may be, though I see noproofs of such grim paternity written in her countenance: Pilot is morelike me than she. Some years after I had broken with the mother, sheabandoned her child, and ran away to Italy with a musician or singer. Iacknowledged no natural claim on Adèle’s part to be supported by me,nor do I now acknowledge any, for I am not her father; but hearing thatshe was quite destitute, I e’en took the poor thing out of the slimeand mud of Paris, and transplanted it here, to grow up clean in thewholesome soil of an English country garden. Mrs. Fairfax found you totrain it; but now you know that it is the illegitimate offspring of aFrench opera-girl, you will perhaps think differently of your post andprotégée: you will be coming to me some day with notice that you havefound another place—that you beg me to look out for a new governess,&c.—Eh?”“No: Adèle is not answerable for either her mother’s faults or yours: Ihave a regard for her; and now that I know she is, in a sense,parentless—forsaken by her mother and disowned by you, sir—I shallcling closer to her than before. How could I possibly prefer the spoiltpet of a wealthy family, who would hate her governess as a nuisance, toa lonely little orphan, who leans towards her as a friend?”“Oh, that is the light in which you view it! Well, I must go in now;and you too: it darkens.”But I stayed out a few minutes longer with Adèle and Pilot—ran a racewith her, and played a game of battledore and shuttlecock. When we wentin, and I had removed her bonnet and coat, I took her on my knee; kepther there an hour, allowing her to prattle as she liked: not rebukingeven some little freedoms and trivialities into which she was apt tostray when much noticed, and which betrayed in her a superficiality ofcharacter, inherited probably from her mother, hardly congenial to anEnglish mind. Still she had her merits; and I was disposed toappreciate all that was good in her to the utmost. I sought in hercountenance and features a likeness to Mr. Rochester, but found none:no trait, no turn of expression announced relationship. It was a pity:if she could but have been proved to resemble him, he would havethought more of her.It was not till after I had withdrawn to my own chamber for the night,that I steadily reviewed the tale Mr. Rochester had told me. As he hadsaid, there was probably nothing at all extraordinary in the substanceof the narrative itself: a wealthy Englishman’s passion for a Frenchdancer, and her treachery to him, were every-day matters enough, nodoubt, in society; but there was something decidedly strange in theparoxysm of emotion which had suddenly seized him when he was in theact of expressing the present contentment of his mood, and his newlyrevived pleasure in the old hall and its environs. I meditatedwonderingly on this incident; but gradually quitting it, as I found itfor the present inexplicable, I turned to the consideration of mymaster’s manner to myself. The confidence he had thought fit to reposein me seemed a tribute to my discretion: I regarded and accepted it assuch. His deportment had now for some weeks been more uniform towardsme than at the first. I never seemed in his way; he did not take fitsof chilling hauteur: when he met me unexpectedly, the encounter seemedwelcome; he had always a word and sometimes a smile for me: whensummoned by formal invitation to his presence, I was honoured by acordiality of reception that made me feel I really possessed the powerto amuse him, and that these evening conferences were sought as muchfor his pleasure as for my benefit.I, indeed, talked comparatively little, but I heard him talk withrelish. It was his nature to be communicative; he liked to open to amind unacquainted with the world glimpses of its scenes and ways (I donot mean its corrupt scenes and wicked ways, but such as derived theirinterest from the great scale on which they were acted, the strangenovelty by which they were characterised); and I had a keen delight inreceiving the new ideas he offered, in imagining the new pictures heportrayed, and following him in thought through the new regions hedisclosed, never startled or troubled by one noxious allusion.The ease of his manner freed me from painful restraint: the friendlyfrankness, as correct as cordial, with which he treated me, drew me tohim. I felt at times as if he were my relation rather than my master:yet he was imperious sometimes still; but I did not mind that; I saw itwas his way. So happy, so gratified did I become with this new interestadded to life, that I ceased to pine after kindred: my thincrescent-destiny seemed to enlarge; the blanks of existence were filledup; my bodily health improved; I gathered flesh and strength.And was Mr. Rochester now ugly in my eyes? No, reader: gratitude, andmany associations, all pleasurable and genial, made his face the objectI best liked to see; his presence in a room was more cheering than thebrightest fire. Yet I had not forgotten his faults; indeed, I couldnot, for he brought them frequently before me. He was proud, sardonic,harsh to inferiority of every description: in my secret soul I knewthat his great kindness to me was balanced by unjust severity to manyothers. He was moody, too; unaccountably so; I more than once, whensent for to read to him, found him sitting in his library alone, withhis head bent on his folded arms; and, when he looked up, a morose,almost a malignant, scowl blackened his features. But I believed thathis moodiness, his harshness, and his former faults of morality (I say_former_, for now he seemed corrected of them) had their source in somecruel cross of fate. I believed he was naturally a man of bettertendencies, higher principles, and purer tastes than such ascircumstances had developed, education instilled, or destinyencouraged. I thought there were excellent materials in him; though forthe present they hung together somewhat spoiled and tangled. I cannotdeny that I grieved for his grief, whatever that was, and would havegiven much to assuage it.Though I had now extinguished my candle and was laid down in bed, Icould not sleep for thinking of his look when he paused in the avenue,and told how his destiny had risen up before him, and dared him to behappy at Thornfield.“Why not?” I asked myself. “What alienates him from the house? Will heleave it again soon? Mrs. Fairfax said he seldom stayed here longerthan a fortnight at a time; and he has now been resident eight weeks.If he does go, the change will be doleful. Suppose he should be absentspring, summer, and autumn: how joyless sunshine and fine days willseem!”I hardly know whether I had slept or not after this musing; at anyrate, I started wide awake on hearing a vague murmur, peculiar andlugubrious, which sounded, I thought, just above me. I wished I hadkept my candle burning: the night was drearily dark; my spirits weredepressed. I rose and sat up in bed, listening. The sound was hushed.I tried again to sleep; but my heart beat anxiously: my inwardtranquillity was broken. The clock, far down in the hall, struck two.Just then it seemed my chamber-door was touched; as if fingers hadswept the panels in groping a way along the dark gallery outside. Isaid, “Who is there?” Nothing answered. I was chilled with fear.All at once I remembered that it might be Pilot, who, when thekitchen-door chanced to be left open, not unfrequently found his way upto the threshold of Mr. Rochester’s chamber: I had seen him lying theremyself in the mornings. The idea calmed me somewhat: I lay down.Silence composes the nerves; and as an unbroken hush now reigned againthrough the whole house, I began to feel the return of slumber. But itwas not fated that I should sleep that night. A dream had scarcelyapproached my ear, when it fled affrighted, scared by a marrow-freezingincident enough.This was a demoniac laugh—low, suppressed, and deep—uttered, as itseemed, at the very keyhole of my chamber door. The head of my bed wasnear the door, and I thought at first the goblin-laugher stood at mybedside—or rather, crouched by my pillow: but I rose, looked round, andcould see nothing; while, as I still gazed, the unnatural sound wasreiterated: and I knew it came from behind the panels. My first impulsewas to rise and fasten the bolt; my next, again to cry out, “Who isthere?”Something gurgled and moaned. Ere long, steps retreated up the gallerytowards the third-storey staircase: a door had lately been made to shutin that staircase; I heard it open and close, and all was still.“Was that Grace Poole? and is she possessed with a devil?” thought I.Impossible now to remain longer by myself: I must go to Mrs. Fairfax. Ihurried on my frock and a shawl; I withdrew the bolt and opened thedoor with a trembling hand. There was a candle burning just outside,and on the matting in the gallery. I was surprised at thiscircumstance: but still more was I amazed to perceive the air quitedim, as if filled with smoke; and, while looking to the right hand andleft, to find whence these blue wreaths issued, I became further awareof a strong smell of burning.Something creaked: it was a door ajar; and that door was Mr.Rochester’s, and the smoke rushed in a cloud from thence. I thought nomore of Mrs. Fairfax; I thought no more of Grace Poole, or the laugh:in an instant, I was within the chamber. Tongues of flame darted roundthe bed: the curtains were on fire. In the midst of blaze and vapour,Mr. Rochester lay stretched motionless, in deep sleep.“Wake! wake!” I cried. I shook him, but he only murmured and turned:the smoke had stupefied him. Not a moment could be lost: the verysheets were kindling, I rushed to his basin and ewer; fortunately, onewas wide and the other deep, and both were filled with water. I heavedthem up, deluged the bed and its occupant, flew back to my own room,brought my own water-jug, baptized the couch afresh, and, by God’s aid,succeeded in extinguishing the flames which were devouring it.The hiss of the quenched element, the breakage of a pitcher which Iflung from my hand when I had emptied it, and, above all, the splash ofthe shower-bath I had liberally bestowed, roused Mr. Rochester at last.Though it was now dark, I knew he was awake; because I heard himfulminating strange anathemas at finding himself lying in a pool ofwater.“Is there a flood?” he cried.“No, sir,” I answered; “but there has been a fire: get up, do; you arequenched now; I will fetch you a candle.”“In the name of all the elves in Christendom, is that Jane Eyre?” hedemanded. “What have you done with me, witch, sorceress? Who is in theroom besides you? Have you plotted to drown me?”“I will fetch you a candle, sir; and, in Heaven’s name, get up.Somebody has plotted something: you cannot too soon find out who andwhat it is.”“There! I am up now; but at your peril you fetch a candle yet: wait twominutes till I get into some dry garments, if any dry there be—yes,here is my dressing-gown. Now run!”I did run; I brought the candle which still remained in the gallery. Hetook it from my hand, held it up, and surveyed the bed, all blackenedand scorched, the sheets drenched, the carpet round swimming in water.“What is it? and who did it?” he asked.I briefly related to him what had transpired: the strange laugh I hadheard in the gallery: the step ascending to the third storey; thesmoke,—the smell of fire which had conducted me to his room; in whatstate I had found matters there, and how I had deluged him with all thewater I could lay hands on.“What is it and who did it?” he askedHe listened very gravely; his face, as I went on, expressed moreconcern than astonishment; he did not immediately speak when I hadconcluded.“Shall I call Mrs. Fairfax?” I asked.“Mrs. Fairfax? No; what the deuce would you call her for? What can shedo? Let her sleep unmolested.”“Then I will fetch Leah, and wake John and his wife.”“Not at all: just be still. You have a shawl on. If you are not warmenough, you may take my cloak yonder; wrap it about you, and sit downin the arm-chair: there,—I will put it on. Now place your feet on thestool, to keep them out of the wet. I am going to leave you a fewminutes. I shall take the candle. Remain where you are till I return;be as still as a mouse. I must pay a visit to the second storey. Don’tmove, remember, or call any one.”He went: I watched the light withdraw. He passed up the gallery verysoftly, unclosed the staircase door with as little noise as possible,shut it after him, and the last ray vanished. I was left in totaldarkness. I listened for some noise, but heard nothing. A very longtime elapsed. I grew weary: it was cold, in spite of the cloak; andthen I did not see the use of staying, as I was not to rouse the house.I was on the point of risking Mr. Rochester’s displeasure by disobeyinghis orders, when the light once more gleamed dimly on the gallery wall,and I heard his unshod feet tread the matting. “I hope it is he,”thought I, “and not something worse.”He re-entered, pale and very gloomy. “I have found it all out,” saidhe, setting his candle down on the washstand; “it is as I thought.”“How, sir?”He made no reply, but stood with his arms folded, looking on theground. At the end of a few minutes he inquired in rather a peculiartone—“I forget whether you said you saw anything when you opened yourchamber door.”“No, sir, only the candlestick on the ground.”“But you heard an odd laugh? You have heard that laugh before, I shouldthink, or something like it?”“Yes, sir: there is a woman who sews here, called Grace Poole,—shelaughs in that way. She is a singular person.”“Just so. Grace Poole—you have guessed it. She is, as you say,singular—very. Well, I shall reflect on the subject. Meantime, I amglad that you are the only person, besides myself, acquainted with theprecise details of to-night’s incident. You are no talking fool: saynothing about it. I will account for this state of affairs” (pointingto the bed): “and now return to your own room. I shall do very well onthe sofa in the library for the rest of the night. It is near four:—intwo hours the servants will be up.”“Good-night, then, sir,” said I, departing.He seemed surprised—very inconsistently so, as he had just told me togo.“What!” he exclaimed, “are you quitting me already, and in that way?”“You said I might go, sir.”“But not without taking leave; not without a word or two ofacknowledgment and good-will: not, in short, in that brief, dryfashion. Why, you have saved my life!—snatched me from a horrible andexcruciating death! and you walk past me as if we were mutualstrangers! At least shake hands.”He held out his hand; I gave him mine: he took it first in one, then inboth his own.“You have saved my life: I have a pleasure in owing you so immense adebt. I cannot say more. Nothing else that has being would have beentolerable to me in the character of creditor for such an obligation:but you: it is different;—I feel your benefits no burden, Jane.”He paused; gazed at me: words almost visible trembled on his lips,—buthis voice was checked.“Good-night again, sir. There is no debt, benefit, burden, obligation,in the case.”“I knew,” he continued, “you would do me good in some way, at sometime;—I saw it in your eyes when I first beheld you: their expressionand smile did not”—(again he stopped)—“did not” (he proceeded hastily)“strike delight to my very inmost heart so for nothing. People talk ofnatural sympathies; I have heard of good genii: there are grains oftruth in the wildest fable. My cherished preserver, good-night!”Strange energy was in his voice, strange fire in his look.“I am glad I happened to be awake,” I said: and then I was going.“What! you _will_ go?”“I am cold, sir.”“Cold? Yes,—and standing in a pool! Go, then, Jane; go!” But he stillretained my hand, and I could not free it. I bethought myself of anexpedient.“I think I hear Mrs. Fairfax move, sir,” said I.“Well, leave me:” he relaxed his fingers, and I was gone.I regained my couch, but never thought of sleep. Till morning dawned Iwas tossed on a buoyant but unquiet sea, where billows of troublerolled under surges of joy. I thought sometimes I saw beyond its wildwaters a shore, sweet as the hills of Beulah; and now and then afreshening gale, wakened by hope, bore my spirit triumphantly towardsthe bourne: but I could not reach it, even in fancy—a counteractingbreeze blew off land, and continually drove me back. Sense would resistdelirium: judgment would warn passion. Too feverish to rest, I rose assoon as day dawned.CHAPTER XVII both wished and feared to see Mr. Rochester on the day which followedthis sleepless night: I wanted to hear his voice again, yet feared tomeet his eye. During the early part of the morning, I momentarilyexpected his coming; he was not in the frequent habit of entering theschoolroom, but he did step in for a few minutes sometimes, and I hadthe impression that he was sure to visit it that day.But the morning passed just as usual: nothing happened to interrupt thequiet course of Adèle’s studies; only soon after breakfast, I heardsome bustle in the neighbourhood of Mr. Rochester’s chamber, Mrs.Fairfax’s voice, and Leah’s, and the cook’s—that is, John’s wife—andeven John’s own gruff tones. There were exclamations of “What a mercymaster was not burnt in his bed!” “It is always dangerous to keep acandle lit at night.” “How providential that he had presence of mind tothink of the water-jug!” “I wonder he waked nobody!” “It is to be hopedhe will not take cold with sleeping on the library sofa,” &c.To much confabulation succeeded a sound of scrubbing and setting torights; and when I passed the room, in going downstairs to dinner, Isaw through the open door that all was again restored to completeorder; only the bed was stripped of its hangings. Leah stood up in thewindow-seat, rubbing the panes of glass dimmed with smoke. I was aboutto address her, for I wished to know what account had been given of theaffair: but, on advancing, I saw a second person in the chamber—a womansitting on a chair by the bedside, and sewing rings to new curtains.That woman was no other than Grace Poole.There she sat, staid and taciturn-looking, as usual, in her brown stuffgown, her check apron, white handkerchief, and cap. She was intent onher work, in which her whole thoughts seemed absorbed: on her hardforehead, and in her commonplace features, was nothing either of thepaleness or desperation one would have expected to see marking thecountenance of a woman who had attempted murder, and whose intendedvictim had followed her last night to her lair, and (as I believed),charged her with the crime she wished to perpetrate. I wasamazed—confounded. She looked up, while I still gazed at her: no start,no increase or failure of colour betrayed emotion, consciousness ofguilt, or fear of detection. She said “Good morning, Miss,” in herusual phlegmatic and brief manner; and taking up another ring and moretape, went on with her sewing.“I will put her to some test,” thought I: “such absoluteimpenetrability is past comprehension.”“Good morning, Grace,” I said. “Has anything happened here? I thought Iheard the servants all talking together a while ago.”“Only master had been reading in his bed last night; he fell asleepwith his candle lit, and the curtains got on fire; but, fortunately, heawoke before the bed-clothes or the wood-work caught, and contrived toquench the flames with the water in the ewer.”“A strange affair!” I said, in a low voice: then, looking at herfixedly—“Did Mr. Rochester wake nobody? Did no one hear him move?”She again raised her eyes to me, and this time there was something ofconsciousness in their expression. She seemed to examine me warily;then she answered—“The servants sleep so far off, you know, Miss, they would not belikely to hear. Mrs. Fairfax’s room and yours are the nearest tomaster’s; but Mrs. Fairfax said she heard nothing: when people getelderly, they often sleep heavy.” She paused, and then added, with asort of assumed indifference, but still in a marked and significanttone—“But you are young, Miss; and I should say a light sleeper:perhaps you may have heard a noise?”“I did,” said I, dropping my voice, so that Leah, who was stillpolishing the panes, could not hear me, “and at first I thought it wasPilot: but Pilot cannot laugh; and I am certain I heard a laugh, and astrange one.”She took a new needleful of thread, waxed it carefully, threaded herneedle with a steady hand, and then observed, with perfect composure—“It is hardly likely master would laugh, I should think, Miss, when hewas in such danger: You must have been dreaming.”“I was not dreaming,” I said, with some warmth, for her brazen coolnessprovoked me. Again she looked at me; and with the same scrutinising andconscious eye.“Have you told master that you heard a laugh?” she inquired.“I have not had the opportunity of speaking to him this morning.”“You did not think of opening your door and looking out into thegallery?” she further asked.She appeared to be cross-questioning me, attempting to draw from meinformation unawares. The idea struck me that if she discovered I knewor suspected her guilt, she would be playing of some of her malignantpranks on me; I thought it advisable to be on my guard.“On the contrary,” said I, “I bolted my door.”“Then you are not in the habit of bolting your door every night beforeyou get into bed?”“Fiend! she wants to know my habits, that she may lay her plansaccordingly!” Indignation again prevailed over prudence: I repliedsharply, “Hitherto I have often omitted to fasten the bolt: I did notthink it necessary. I was not aware any danger or annoyance was to bedreaded at Thornfield Hall: but in future” (and I laid marked stress onthe words) “I shall take good care to make all secure before I ventureto lie down.”“It will be wise so to do,” was her answer: “this neighbourhood is asquiet as any I know, and I never heard of the hall being attempted byrobbers since it was a house; though there are hundreds of pounds’worth of plate in the plate-closet, as is well known. And you see, forsuch a large house, there are very few servants, because master hasnever lived here much; and when he does come, being a bachelor, heneeds little waiting on: but I always think it best to err on the safeside; a door is soon fastened, and it is as well to have a drawn boltbetween one and any mischief that may be about. A deal of people, Miss,are for trusting all to Providence; but I say Providence will notdispense with the means, though He often blesses them when they areused discreetly.” And here she closed her harangue: a long one for her,and uttered with the demureness of a Quakeress.I still stood absolutely dumfoundered at what appeared to me hermiraculous self-possession and most inscrutable hypocrisy, when thecook entered.“Mrs. Poole,” said she, addressing Grace, “the servants’ dinner willsoon be ready: will you come down?”“No; just put my pint of porter and bit of pudding on a tray, and I’llcarry it upstairs.”“You’ll have some meat?”“Just a morsel, and a taste of cheese, that’s all.”“And the sago?”“Never mind it at present: I shall be coming down before teatime: I’llmake it myself.”The cook here turned to me, saying that Mrs. Fairfax was waiting forme: so I departed.I hardly heard Mrs. Fairfax’s account of the curtain conflagrationduring dinner, so much was I occupied in puzzling my brains over theenigmatical character of Grace Poole, and still more in pondering theproblem of her position at Thornfield and questioning why she had notbeen given into custody that morning, or, at the very least, dismissedfrom her master’s service. He had almost as much as declared hisconviction of her criminality last night: what mysterious causewithheld him from accusing her? Why had he enjoined me, too, tosecrecy? It was strange: a bold, vindictive, and haughty gentlemanseemed somehow in the power of one of the meanest of his dependents; somuch in her power, that even when she lifted her hand against his life,he dared not openly charge her with the attempt, much less punish herfor it.Had Grace been young and handsome, I should have been tempted to thinkthat tenderer feelings than prudence or fear influenced Mr. Rochesterin her behalf; but, hard-favoured and matronly as she was, the ideacould not be admitted. “Yet,” I reflected, “she has been young once;her youth would be contemporary with her master’s: Mrs. Fairfax told meonce, she had lived here many years. I don’t think she can ever havebeen pretty; but, for aught I know, she may possess originality andstrength of character to compensate for the want of personaladvantages. Mr. Rochester is an amateur of the decided and eccentric:Grace is eccentric at least. What if a former caprice (a freak verypossible to a nature so sudden and headstrong as his) has delivered himinto her power, and she now exercises over his actions a secretinfluence, the result of his own indiscretion, which he cannot shakeoff, and dare not disregard?” But, having reached this point ofconjecture, Mrs. Poole’s square, flat figure, and uncomely, dry, evencoarse face, recurred so distinctly to my mind’s eye, that I thought,“No; impossible! my supposition cannot be correct. Yet,” suggested thesecret voice which talks to us in our own hearts, “_you_ are notbeautiful either, and perhaps Mr. Rochester approves you: at any rate,you have often felt as if he did; and last night—remember his words;remember his look; remember his voice!”I well remembered all; language, glance, and tone seemed at the momentvividly renewed. I was now in the schoolroom; Adèle was drawing; I bentover her and directed her pencil. She looked up with a sort of start.“Qu’avez-vous, mademoiselle?” said she. “Vos doigts tremblent comme lafeuille, et vos joues sont rouges: mais, rouges comme des cerises!”“I am hot, Adèle, with stooping!” She went on sketching; I went onthinking.I hastened to drive from my mind the hateful notion I had beenconceiving respecting Grace Poole; it disgusted me. I compared myselfwith her, and found we were different. Bessie Leaven had said I wasquite a lady; and she spoke truth—I was a lady. And now I looked muchbetter than I did when Bessie saw me; I had more colour and more flesh,more life, more vivacity, because I had brighter hopes and keenerenjoyments.“Evening approaches,” said I, as I looked towards the window. “I havenever heard Mr. Rochester’s voice or step in the house to-day; butsurely I shall see him before night: I feared the meeting in themorning; now I desire it, because expectation has been so long baffledthat it is grown impatient.”When dusk actually closed, and when Adèle left me to go and play in thenursery with Sophie, I did most keenly desire it. I listened for thebell to ring below; I listened for Leah coming up with a message; Ifancied sometimes I heard Mr. Rochester’s own tread, and I turned tothe door, expecting it to open and admit him. The door remained shut;darkness only came in through the window. Still it was not late; heoften sent for me at seven and eight o’clock, and it was yet but six.Surely I should not be wholly disappointed to-night, when I had so manythings to say to him! I wanted again to introduce the subject of GracePoole, and to hear what he would answer; I wanted to ask him plainly ifhe really believed it was she who had made last night’s hideousattempt; and if so, why he kept her wickedness a secret. It littlemattered whether my curiosity irritated him; I knew the pleasure ofvexing and soothing him by turns; it was one I chiefly delighted in,and a sure instinct always prevented me from going too far; beyond theverge of provocation I never ventured; on the extreme brink I likedwell to try my skill. Retaining every minute form of respect, everypropriety of my station, I could still meet him in argument withoutfear or uneasy restraint; this suited both him and me.A tread creaked on the stairs at last. Leah made her appearance; but itwas only to intimate that tea was ready in Mrs. Fairfax’s room. ThitherI repaired, glad at least to go downstairs; for that brought me, Iimagined, nearer to Mr. Rochester’s presence.“You must want your tea,” said the good lady, as I joined her; “you ateso little at dinner. I am afraid,” she continued, “you are not wellto-day: you look flushed and feverish.”“Oh, quite well! I never felt better.”“Then you must prove it by evincing a good appetite; will you fill theteapot while I knit off this needle?” Having completed her task, sherose to draw down the blind, which she had hitherto kept up, by way, Isuppose, of making the most of daylight, though dusk was now fastdeepening into total obscurity.“It is fair to-night,” said she, as she looked through the panes,“though not starlight; Mr. Rochester has, on the whole, had afavourable day for his journey.”“Journey!—Is Mr. Rochester gone anywhere? I did not know he was out.”“Oh, he set off the moment he had breakfasted! He is gone to the Leas,Mr. Eshton’s place, ten miles on the other side Millcote. I believethere is quite a party assembled there; Lord Ingram, Sir George Lynn,Colonel Dent, and others.”“Do you expect him back to-night?”“No—nor to-morrow either; I should think he is very likely to stay aweek or more: when these fine, fashionable people get together, theyare so surrounded by elegance and gaiety, so well provided with allthat can please and entertain, they are in no hurry to separate.Gentlemen especially are often in request on such occasions; and Mr.Rochester is so talented and so lively in society, that I believe he isa general favourite: the ladies are very fond of him; though you wouldnot think his appearance calculated to recommend him particularly intheir eyes: but I suppose his acquirements and abilities, perhaps hiswealth and good blood, make amends for any little fault of look.”“Are there ladies at the Leas?”“There are Mrs. Eshton and her three daughters—very elegant youngladies indeed; and there are the Honourable Blanche and Mary Ingram,most beautiful women, I suppose: indeed I have seen Blanche, six orseven years since, when she was a girl of eighteen. She came here to aChristmas ball and party Mr. Rochester gave. You should have seen thedining-room that day—how richly it was decorated, how brilliantly litup! I should think there were fifty ladies and gentlemen present—all ofthe first county families; and Miss Ingram was considered the belle ofthe evening.”“You saw her, you say, Mrs. Fairfax: what was she like?”“Yes, I saw her. The dining-room doors were thrown open; and, as it wasChristmas-time, the servants were allowed to assemble in the hall, tohear some of the ladies sing and play. Mr. Rochester would have me tocome in, and I sat down in a quiet corner and watched them. I never sawa more splendid scene: the ladies were magnificently dressed; most ofthem—at least most of the younger ones—looked handsome; but Miss Ingramwas certainly the queen.”“And what was she like?”“Tall, fine bust, sloping shoulders; long, graceful neck: olivecomplexion, dark and clear; noble features; eyes rather like Mr.Rochester’s: large and black, and as brilliant as her jewels. And thenshe had such a fine head of hair; raven-black and so becominglyarranged: a crown of thick plaits behind, and in front the longest, theglossiest curls I ever saw. She was dressed in pure white; anamber-coloured scarf was passed over her shoulder and across herbreast, tied at the side, and descending in long, fringed ends belowher knee. She wore an amber-coloured flower, too, in her hair: itcontrasted well with the jetty mass of her curls.”“She was greatly admired, of course?”“Yes, indeed: and not only for her beauty, but for her accomplishments.She was one of the ladies who sang: a gentleman accompanied her on thepiano. She and Mr. Rochester sang a duet.”“Mr. Rochester? I was not aware he could sing.”“Oh! he has a fine bass voice, and an excellent taste for music.”“And Miss Ingram: what sort of a voice had she?”“A very rich and powerful one: she sang delightfully; it was a treat tolisten to her;—and she played afterwards. I am no judge of music, butMr. Rochester is; and I heard him say her execution was remarkablygood.”“And this beautiful and accomplished lady, she is not yet married?”“It appears not: I fancy neither she nor her sister have very largefortunes. Old Lord Ingram’s estates were chiefly entailed, and theeldest son came in for everything almost.”“But I wonder no wealthy nobleman or gentleman has taken a fancy toher: Mr. Rochester, for instance. He is rich, is he not?”“Oh! yes. But you see there is a considerable difference in age: Mr.Rochester is nearly forty; she is but twenty-five.”“What of that? More unequal matches are made every day.”“True: yet I should scarcely fancy Mr. Rochester would entertain anidea of the sort. But you eat nothing: you have scarcely tasted sinceyou began tea.”“No: I am too thirsty to eat. Will you let me have another cup?”I was about again to revert to the probability of a union between Mr.Rochester and the beautiful Blanche; but Adèle came in, and theconversation was turned into another channel.When once more alone, I reviewed the information I had got; looked intomy heart, examined its thoughts and feelings, and endeavoured to bringback with a strict hand such as had been straying through imagination’sboundless and trackless waste, into the safe fold of common sense.Arraigned at my own bar, Memory having given her evidence of the hopes,wishes, sentiments I had been cherishing since last night—of thegeneral state of mind in which I had indulged for nearly a fortnightpast; Reason having come forward and told, in her own quiet way, aplain, unvarnished tale, showing how I had rejected the real, andrabidly devoured the ideal;—I pronounced judgment to this effect:—That a greater fool than Jane Eyre had never breathed the breath oflife; that a more fantastic idiot had never surfeited herself on sweetlies, and swallowed poison as if it were nectar.“_You_,” I said, “a favourite with Mr. Rochester? _You_ gifted with thepower of pleasing him? _You_ of importance to him in any way? Go! yourfolly sickens me. And you have derived pleasure from occasional tokensof preference—equivocal tokens shown by a gentleman of family and a manof the world to a dependent and a novice. How dared you? Poor stupiddupe!—Could not even self-interest make you wiser? You repeated toyourself this morning the brief scene of last night?—Cover your faceand be ashamed! He said something in praise of your eyes, did he? Blindpuppy! Open their bleared lids and look on your own accursedsenselessness! It does good to no woman to be flattered by hersuperior, who cannot possibly intend to marry her; and it is madness inall women to let a secret love kindle within them, which, if unreturnedand unknown, must devour the life that feeds it; and, if discovered andresponded to, must lead, _ignis-fatuus_-like, into miry wilds whencethere is no extrication.“Listen, then, Jane Eyre, to your sentence: to-morrow, place the glassbefore you, and draw in chalk your own picture, faithfully, withoutsoftening one defect; omit no harsh line, smooth away no displeasingirregularity; write under it, ‘Portrait of a Governess, disconnected,poor, and plain.’“Afterwards, take a piece of smooth ivory—you have one prepared in yourdrawing-box: take your palette, mix your freshest, finest, clearesttints; choose your most delicate camel-hair pencils; delineatecarefully the loveliest face you can imagine; paint it in your softestshades and sweetest lines, according to the description given by Mrs.Fairfax of Blanche Ingram; remember the raven ringlets, the orientaleye;—What! you revert to Mr. Rochester as a model! Order! No snivel!—nosentiment!—no regret! I will endure only sense and resolution. Recallthe august yet harmonious lineaments, the Grecian neck and bust; letthe round and dazzling arm be visible, and the delicate hand; omitneither diamond ring nor gold bracelet; portray faithfully the attire,aërial lace and glistening satin, graceful scarf and golden rose; callit ‘Blanche, an accomplished lady of rank.’“Whenever, in future, you should chance to fancy Mr. Rochester thinkswell of you, take out these two pictures and compare them: say, ‘Mr.Rochester might probably win that noble lady’s love, if he chose tostrive for it; is it likely he would waste a serious thought on thisindigent and insignificant plebeian?’”“I’ll do it,” I resolved: and having framed this determination, I grewcalm, and fell asleep.I kept my word. An hour or two sufficed to sketch my own portrait incrayons; and in less than a fortnight I had completed an ivoryminiature of an imaginary Blanche Ingram. It looked a lovely faceenough, and when compared with the real head in chalk, the contrast wasas great as self-control could desire. I derived benefit from the task:it had kept my head and hands employed, and had given force andfixedness to the new impressions I wished to stamp indelibly on myheart.Ere long, I had reason to congratulate myself on the course ofwholesome discipline to which I had thus forced my feelings to submit.Thanks to it, I was able to meet subsequent occurrences with a decentcalm, which, had they found me unprepared, I should probably have beenunequal to maintain, even externally.CHAPTER XVIIA week passed, and no news arrived of Mr. Rochester: ten days, andstill he did not come. Mrs. Fairfax said she should not be surprised ifhe were to go straight from the Leas to London, and thence to theContinent, and not show his face again at Thornfield for a year tocome; he had not unfrequently quitted it in a manner quite as abruptand unexpected. When I heard this, I was beginning to feel a strangechill and failing at the heart. I was actually permitting myself toexperience a sickening sense of disappointment; but rallying my wits,and recollecting my principles, I at once called my sensations toorder; and it was wonderful how I got over the temporary blunder—how Icleared up the mistake of supposing Mr. Rochester’s movements a matterin which I had any cause to take a vital interest. Not that I humbledmyself by a slavish notion of inferiority: on the contrary, I justsaid—“You have nothing to do with the master of Thornfield, further than toreceive the salary he gives you for teaching his protégée, and to begrateful for such respectful and kind treatment as, if you do yourduty, you have a right to expect at his hands. Be sure that is the onlytie he seriously acknowledges between you and him; so don’t make himthe object of your fine feelings, your raptures, agonies, and so forth.He is not of your order: keep to your caste, and be too self-respectingto lavish the love of the whole heart, soul, and strength, where such agift is not wanted and would be despised.”I went on with my day’s business tranquilly; but ever and anon vaguesuggestions kept wandering across my brain of reasons why I should quitThornfield; and I kept involuntarily framing advertisements andpondering conjectures about new situations: these thoughts I did notthink to check; they might germinate and bear fruit if they could.Mr. Rochester had been absent upwards of a fortnight, when the postbrought Mrs. Fairfax a letter.“It is from the master,” said she, as she looked at the direction. “NowI suppose we shall know whether we are to expect his return or not.”And while she broke the seal and perused the document, I went on takingmy coffee (we were at breakfast): it was hot, and I attributed to thatcircumstance a fiery glow which suddenly rose to my face. Why my handshook, and why I involuntarily spilt half the contents of my cup intomy saucer, I did not choose to consider.“Well, I sometimes think we are too quiet; but we run a chance of beingbusy enough now: for a little while at least,” said Mrs. Fairfax, stillholding the note before her spectacles.Ere I permitted myself to request an explanation, I tied the string ofAdèle’s pinafore, which happened to be loose: having helped her also toanother bun and refilled her mug with milk, I said, nonchalantly—“Mr. Rochester is not likely to return soon, I suppose?”“Indeed he is—in three days, he says: that will be next Thursday; andnot alone either. I don’t know how many of the fine people at the Leasare coming with him: he sends directions for all the best bedrooms tobe prepared; and the library and drawing-rooms are to be cleaned out; Iam to get more kitchen hands from the George Inn, at Millcote, and fromwherever else I can; and the ladies will bring their maids and thegentlemen their valets: so we shall have a full house of it.” And Mrs.Fairfax swallowed her breakfast and hastened away to commenceoperations.The three days were, as she had foretold, busy enough. I had thoughtall the rooms at Thornfield beautifully clean and well arranged; but itappears I was mistaken. Three women were got to help; and suchscrubbing, such brushing, such washing of paint and beating of carpets,such taking down and putting up of pictures, such polishing of mirrorsand lustres, such lighting of fires in bedrooms, such airing of sheetsand feather-beds on hearths, I never beheld, either before or since.Adèle ran quite wild in the midst of it: the preparations for companyand the prospect of their arrival, seemed to throw her into ecstasies.She would have Sophie to look over all her “toilettes,” as she calledfrocks; to furbish up any that were “_passées_,” and to air and arrangethe new. For herself, she did nothing but caper about in the frontchambers, jump on and off the bedsteads, and lie on the mattresses andpiled-up bolsters and pillows before the enormous fires roaring in thechimneys. From school duties she was exonerated: Mrs. Fairfax hadpressed me into her service, and I was all day in the storeroom,helping (or hindering) her and the cook; learning to make custards andcheese-cakes and French pastry, to truss game and garnishdesert-dishes.The party were expected to arrive on Thursday afternoon, in time fordinner at six. During the intervening period I had no time to nursechimeras; and I believe I was as active and gay as anybody—Adèleexcepted. Still, now and then, I received a damping check to mycheerfulness; and was, in spite of myself, thrown back on the region ofdoubts and portents, and dark conjectures. This was when I chanced tosee the third-storey staircase door (which of late had always been keptlocked) open slowly, and give passage to the form of Grace Poole, inprim cap, white apron, and handkerchief; when I watched her glide alongthe gallery, her quiet tread muffled in a list slipper; when I saw herlook into the bustling, topsy-turvy bedrooms,—just say a word, perhaps,to the charwoman about the proper way to polish a grate, or clean amarble mantelpiece, or take stains from papered walls, and then passon. She would thus descend to the kitchen once a day, eat her dinner,smoke a moderate pipe on the hearth, and go back, carrying her pot ofporter with her, for her private solace, in her own gloomy, upperhaunt. Only one hour in the twenty-four did she pass with herfellow-servants below; all the rest of her time was spent in somelow-ceiled, oaken chamber of the second storey: there she sat andsewed—and probably laughed drearily to herself,—as companionless as aprisoner in his dungeon.The strangest thing of all was, that not a soul in the house, exceptme, noticed her habits, or seemed to marvel at them: no one discussedher position or employment; no one pitied her solitude or isolation. Ionce, indeed, overheard part of a dialogue between Leah and one of thecharwomen, of which Grace formed the subject. Leah had been sayingsomething I had not caught, and the charwoman remarked—“She gets good wages, I guess?”“Yes,” said Leah; “I wish I had as good; not that mine are to complainof,—there’s no stinginess at Thornfield; but they’re not one fifth ofthe sum Mrs. Poole receives. And she is laying by: she goes everyquarter to the bank at Millcote. I should not wonder but she has savedenough to keep her independent if she liked to leave; but I supposeshe’s got used to the place; and then she’s not forty yet, and strongand able for anything. It is too soon for her to give up business.”“She is a good hand, I daresay,” said the charwoman.“Ah!—she understands what she has to do,—nobody better,” rejoined Leahsignificantly; “and it is not every one could fill her shoes—not forall the money she gets.”“That it is not!” was the reply. “I wonder whether the master—”The charwoman was going on; but here Leah turned and perceived me, andshe instantly gave her companion a nudge.“Doesn’t she know?” I heard the woman whisper.Leah shook her head, and the conversation was of course dropped. All Ihad gathered from it amounted to this,—that there was a mystery atThornfield; and that from participation in that mystery I was purposelyexcluded.Thursday came: all work had been completed the previous evening;carpets were laid down, bed-hangings festooned, radiant whitecounterpanes spread, toilet tables arranged, furniture rubbed, flowerspiled in vases: both chambers and saloons looked as fresh and bright ashands could make them. The hall, too, was scoured; and the great carvedclock, as well as the steps and banisters of the staircase, werepolished to the brightness of glass; in the dining-room, the sideboardflashed resplendent with plate; in the drawing-room and boudoir, vasesof exotics bloomed on all sides.Afternoon arrived: Mrs. Fairfax assumed her best black satin gown, hergloves, and her gold watch; for it was her part to receive thecompany,—to conduct the ladies to their rooms, &c. Adèle, too, would bedressed: though I thought she had little chance of being introduced tothe party that day at least. However, to please her, I allowed Sophieto apparel her in one of her short, full muslin frocks. For myself, Ihad no need to make any change; I should not be called upon to quit mysanctum of the schoolroom; for a sanctum it was now become to me,—“avery pleasant refuge in time of trouble.”It had been a mild, serene spring day—one of those days which, towardsthe end of March or the beginning of April, rise shining over the earthas heralds of summer. It was drawing to an end now; but the evening waseven warm, and I sat at work in the schoolroom with the window open.“It gets late,” said Mrs. Fairfax, entering in rustling state. “I amglad I ordered dinner an hour after the time Mr. Rochester mentioned;for it is past six now. I have sent John down to the gates to see ifthere is anything on the road: one can see a long way from thence inthe direction of Millcote.” She went to the window. “Here he is!” saidshe. “Well, John” (leaning out), “any news?”“They’re coming, ma’am,” was the answer. “They’ll be here in tenminutes.”Adèle flew to the window. I followed, taking care to stand on one side,so that, screened by the curtain, I could see without being seen.The ten minutes John had given seemed very long, but at last wheelswere heard; four equestrians galloped up the drive, and after them cametwo open carriages. Fluttering veils and waving plumes filled thevehicles; two of the cavaliers were young, dashing-looking gentlemen;the third was Mr. Rochester, on his black horse, Mesrour, Pilotbounding before him; at his side rode a lady, and he and she were thefirst of the party. Her purple riding-habit almost swept the ground,her veil streamed long on the breeze; mingling with its transparentfolds, and gleaming through them, shone rich raven ringlets.“Miss Ingram!” exclaimed Mrs. Fairfax, and away she hurried to her postbelow.The cavalcade, following the sweep of the drive, quickly turned theangle of the house, and I lost sight of it. Adèle now petitioned to godown; but I took her on my knee, and gave her to understand that shemust not on any account think of venturing in sight of the ladies,either now or at any other time, unless expressly sent for: that Mr.Rochester would be very angry, &c. “Some natural tears she shed” onbeing told this; but as I began to look very grave, she consented atlast to wipe them.A joyous stir was now audible in the hall: gentlemen’s deep tones andladies’ silvery accents blent harmoniously together, anddistinguishable above all, though not loud, was the sonorous voice ofthe master of Thornfield Hall, welcoming his fair and gallant guestsunder its roof. Then light steps ascended the stairs; and there was atripping through the gallery, and soft cheerful laughs, and opening andclosing doors, and, for a time, a hush.“Elles changent de toilettes,” said Adèle; who, listening attentively,had followed every movement; and she sighed.“Chez maman,” said she, “quand il y avait du monde, je le suivaispartout, au salon et à leurs chambres; souvent je regardais les femmesde chambre coiffer et habiller les dames, et c’était si amusant: commecela on apprend.”“Don’t you feel hungry, Adèle?”“Mais oui, mademoiselle: voilà cinq ou six heures que nous n’avons pasmangé.”“Well now, while the ladies are in their rooms, I will venture down andget you something to eat.”And issuing from my asylum with precaution, I sought a back-stairswhich conducted directly to the kitchen. All in that region was fireand commotion; the soup and fish were in the last stage of projection,and the cook hung over her crucibles in a frame of mind and bodythreatening spontaneous combustion. In the servants’ hall two coachmenand three gentlemen’s gentlemen stood or sat round the fire; theabigails, I suppose, were upstairs with their mistresses; the newservants, that had been hired from Millcote, were bustling abouteverywhere. Threading this chaos, I at last reached the larder; there Itook possession of a cold chicken, a roll of bread, some tarts, a plateor two and a knife and fork: with this booty I made a hasty retreat. Ihad regained the gallery, and was just shutting the back-door behindme, when an accelerated hum warned me that the ladies were about toissue from their chambers. I could not proceed to the schoolroomwithout passing some of their doors, and running the risk of beingsurprised with my cargo of victualage; so I stood still at this end,which, being windowless, was dark: quite dark now, for the sun was setand twilight gathering.Presently the chambers gave up their fair tenants one after another:each came out gaily and airily, with dress that gleamed lustrousthrough the dusk. For a moment they stood grouped together at the otherextremity of the gallery, conversing in a key of sweet subduedvivacity: they then descended the staircase almost as noiselessly as abright mist rolls down a hill. Their collective appearance had left onme an impression of high-born elegance, such as I had never beforereceived.I found Adèle peeping through the schoolroom door, which she held ajar.“What beautiful ladies!” cried she in English. “Oh, I wish I might goto them! Do you think Mr. Rochester will send for us by-and-bye, afterdinner?”“No, indeed, I don’t; Mr. Rochester has something else to think about.Never mind the ladies to-night; perhaps you will see them to-morrow:here is your dinner.”She was really hungry, so the chicken and tarts served to divert herattention for a time. It was well I secured this forage, or both she,I, and Sophie, to whom I conveyed a share of our repast, would have runa chance of getting no dinner at all: every one downstairs was too muchengaged to think of us. The dessert was not carried out till afternine; and at ten footmen were still running to and fro with trays andcoffee-cups. I allowed Adèle to sit up much later than usual; for shedeclared she could not possibly go to sleep while the doors keptopening and shutting below, and people bustling about. Besides, sheadded, a message might possibly come from Mr. Rochester when she wasundressed; “et alors quel dommage!”I told her stories as long as she would listen to them; and then for achange I took her out into the gallery. The hall lamp was now lit, andit amused her to look over the balustrade and watch the servantspassing backwards and forwards. When the evening was far advanced, asound of music issued from the drawing-room, whither the piano had beenremoved; Adèle and I sat down on the top step of the stairs to listen.Presently a voice blent with the rich tones of the instrument; it was alady who sang, and very sweet her notes were. The solo over, a duetfollowed, and then a glee: a joyous conversational murmur filled up theintervals. I listened long: suddenly I discovered that my ear waswholly intent on analysing the mingled sounds, and trying todiscriminate amidst the confusion of accents those of Mr. Rochester;and when it caught them, which it soon did, it found a further task inframing the tones, rendered by distance inarticulate, into words.The clock struck eleven. I looked at Adèle, whose head leant against myshoulder; her eyes were waxing heavy, so I took her up in my arms andcarried her off to bed. It was near one before the gentlemen and ladiessought their chambers.The next day was as fine as its predecessor: it was devoted by theparty to an excursion to some site in the neighbourhood. They set outearly in the forenoon, some on horseback, the rest in carriages; Iwitnessed both the departure and the return. Miss Ingram, as before,was the only lady equestrian; and, as before, Mr. Rochester galloped ather side; the two rode a little apart from the rest. I pointed out thiscircumstance to Mrs. Fairfax, who was standing at the window with me—“You said it was not likely they should think of being married,” saidI, “but you see Mr. Rochester evidently prefers her to any of the otherladies.”“Yes, I daresay: no doubt he admires her.”“And she him,” I added; “look how she leans her head towards him as ifshe were conversing confidentially; I wish I could see her face; I havenever had a glimpse of it yet.”“You will see her this evening,” answered Mrs. Fairfax. “I happened toremark to Mr. Rochester how much Adèle wished to be introduced to theladies, and he said: ‘Oh! let her come into the drawing-room afterdinner; and request Miss Eyre to accompany her.’”“Yes; he said that from mere politeness: I need not go, I am sure,” Ianswered.“Well, I observed to him that as you were unused to company, I did notthink you would like appearing before so gay a party—all strangers; andhe replied, in his quick way—‘Nonsense! If she objects, tell her it ismy particular wish; and if she resists, say I shall come and fetch herin case of contumacy.’”“I will not give him that trouble,” I answered. “I will go, if nobetter may be; but I don’t like it. Shall you be there, Mrs. Fairfax?”“No; I pleaded off, and he admitted my plea. I’ll tell you how tomanage so as to avoid the embarrassment of making a formal entrance,which is the most disagreeable part of the business. You must go intothe drawing-room while it is empty, before the ladies leave thedinner-table; choose your seat in any quiet nook you like; you need notstay long after the gentlemen come in, unless you please: just let Mr.Rochester see you are there and then slip away—nobody will notice you.”“Will these people remain long, do you think?”“Perhaps two or three weeks, certainly not more. After the Easterrecess, Sir George Lynn, who was lately elected member for Millcote,will have to go up to town and take his seat; I daresay Mr. Rochesterwill accompany him: it surprises me that he has already made soprotracted a stay at Thornfield.”It was with some trepidation that I perceived the hour approach when Iwas to repair with my charge to the drawing-room. Adèle had been in astate of ecstasy all day, after hearing she was to be presented to theladies in the evening; and it was not till Sophie commenced theoperation of dressing her that she sobered down. Then the importance ofthe process quickly steadied her, and by the time she had her curlsarranged in well-smoothed, drooping clusters, her pink satin frock puton, her long sash tied, and her lace mittens adjusted, she looked asgrave as any judge. No need to warn her not to disarrange her attire:when she was dressed, she sat demurely down in her little chair, takingcare previously to lift up the satin skirt for fear she should creaseit, and assured me she would not stir thence till I was ready. This Iquickly was: my best dress (the silver-grey one, purchased for MissTemple’s wedding, and never worn since) was soon put on; my hair wassoon smoothed; my sole ornament, the pearl brooch, soon assumed. Wedescended.Fortunately there was another entrance to the drawing-room than thatthrough the saloon where they were all seated at dinner. We found theapartment vacant; a large fire burning silently on the marble hearth,and wax candles shining in bright solitude, amid the exquisite flowerswith which the tables were adorned. The crimson curtain hung before thearch: slight as was the separation this drapery formed from the partyin the adjoining saloon, they spoke in so low a key that nothing oftheir conversation could be distinguished beyond a soothing murmur.Adèle, who appeared to be still under the influence of a mostsolemnising impression, sat down, without a word, on the footstool Ipointed out to her. I retired to a window-seat, and taking a book froma table near, endeavoured to read. Adèle brought her stool to my feet;ere long she touched my knee.“What is it, Adèle?”“Est-ce que je ne puis pas prendre une seule de ces fleurs magnifiques,mademoiselle? Seulement pour completer ma toilette.”“You think too much of your ‘toilette,’ Adèle: but you may have aflower.” And I took a rose from a vase and fastened it in her sash. Shesighed a sigh of ineffable satisfaction, as if her cup of happinesswere now full. I turned my face away to conceal a smile I could notsuppress: there was something ludicrous as well as painful in thelittle Parisienne’s earnest and innate devotion to matters of dress.A soft sound of rising now became audible; the curtain was swept backfrom the arch; through it appeared the dining-room, with its lit lustrepouring down light on the silver and glass of a magnificentdessert-service covering a long table; a band of ladies stood in theopening; they entered, and the curtain fell behind them.There were but eight; yet, somehow, as they flocked in, they gave theimpression of a much larger number. Some of them were very tall; manywere dressed in white; and all had a sweeping amplitude of array thatseemed to magnify their persons as a mist magnifies the moon. I roseand curtseyed to them: one or two bent their heads in return, theothers only stared at me.They dispersed about the room, reminding me, by the lightness andbuoyancy of their movements, of a flock of white plumy birds. Some ofthem threw themselves in half-reclining positions on the sofas andottomans: some bent over the tables and examined the flowers and books:the rest gathered in a group round the fire: all talked in a low butclear tone which seemed habitual to them. I knew their namesafterwards, and may as well mention them now.First, there was Mrs. Eshton and two of her daughters. She hadevidently been a handsome woman, and was well preserved still. Of herdaughters, the eldest, Amy, was rather little: naïve, and child-like inface and manner, and piquant in form; her white muslin dress and bluesash became her well. The second, Louisa, was taller and more elegantin figure; with a very pretty face, of that order the French term_minois chiffoné_: both sisters were fair as lilies.Lady Lynn was a large and stout personage of about forty, very erect,very haughty-looking, richly dressed in a satin robe of changefulsheen: her dark hair shone glossily under the shade of an azure plume,and within the circlet of a band of gems.Mrs. Colonel Dent was less showy; but, I thought, more lady-like. Shehad a slight figure, a pale, gentle face, and fair hair. Her blacksatin dress, her scarf of rich foreign lace, and her pearl ornaments,pleased me better than the rainbow radiance of the titled dame.But the three most distinguished—partly, perhaps, because the tallestfigures of the band—were the Dowager Lady Ingram and her daughters,Blanche and Mary. They were all three of the loftiest stature of women.The Dowager might be between forty and fifty: her shape was still fine;her hair (by candle-light at least) still black; her teeth, too, werestill apparently perfect. Most people would have termed her a splendidwoman of her age: and so she was, no doubt, physically speaking; butthen there was an expression of almost insupportable haughtiness in herbearing and countenance. She had Roman features and a double chin,disappearing into a throat like a pillar: these features appeared to menot only inflated and darkened, but even furrowed with pride; and thechin was sustained by the same principle, in a position of almostpreternatural erectness. She had, likewise, a fierce and a hard eye: itreminded me of Mrs. Reed’s; she mouthed her words in speaking; hervoice was deep, its inflections very pompous, very dogmatical,—veryintolerable, in short. A crimson velvet robe, and a shawl turban ofsome gold-wrought Indian fabric, invested her (I suppose she thought)with a truly imperial dignity.Blanche and Mary were of equal stature,—straight and tall as poplars.Mary was too slim for her height, but Blanche was moulded like a Dian.I regarded her, of course, with special interest. First, I wished tosee whether her appearance accorded with Mrs. Fairfax’s description;secondly, whether it at all resembled the fancy miniature I had paintedof her; and thirdly—it will out!—whether it were such as I should fancylikely to suit Mr. Rochester’s taste.As far as person went, she answered point for point, both to my pictureand Mrs. Fairfax’s description. The noble bust, the sloping shoulders,the graceful neck, the dark eyes and black ringlets were all there;—buther face? Her face was like her mother’s; a youthful unfurrowedlikeness: the same low brow, the same high features, the same pride. Itwas not, however, so saturnine a pride! she laughed continually; herlaugh was satirical, and so was the habitual expression of her archedand haughty lip.Genius is said to be self-conscious. I cannot tell whether Miss Ingramwas a genius, but she was self-conscious—remarkably self-consciousindeed. She entered into a discourse on botany with the gentle Mrs.Dent. It seemed Mrs. Dent had not studied that science: though, as shesaid, she liked flowers, “especially wild ones;” Miss Ingram had, andshe ran over its vocabulary with an air. I presently perceived she was(what is vernacularly termed) _trailing_ Mrs. Dent; that is, playing onher ignorance; her _trail_ might be clever, but it was decidedly notgood-natured. She played: her execution was brilliant; she sang: hervoice was fine; she talked French apart to her mamma; and she talked itwell, with fluency and with a good accent.Mary had a milder and more open countenance than Blanche; softerfeatures too, and a skin some shades fairer (Miss Ingram was dark as aSpaniard)—but Mary was deficient in life: her face lacked expression,her eye lustre; she had nothing to say, and having once taken her seat,remained fixed like a statue in its niche. The sisters were bothattired in spotless white.And did I now think Miss Ingram such a choice as Mr. Rochester would belikely to make? I could not tell—I did not know his taste in femalebeauty. If he liked the majestic, she was the very type of majesty:then she was accomplished, sprightly. Most gentlemen would admire her,I thought; and that he _did_ admire her, I already seemed to haveobtained proof: to remove the last shade of doubt, it remained but tosee them together.You are not to suppose, reader, that Adèle has all this time beensitting motionless on the stool at my feet: no; when the ladiesentered, she rose, advanced to meet them, made a stately reverence, andsaid with gravity—“Bon jour, mesdames.”And Miss Ingram had looked down at her with a mocking air, andexclaimed, “Oh, what a little puppet!”Lady Lynn had remarked, “It is Mr. Rochester’s ward, I suppose—thelittle French girl he was speaking of.”Mrs. Dent had kindly taken her hand, and given her a kiss. Amy andLouisa Eshton had cried out simultaneously—“What a love of a child!”And then they had called her to a sofa, where she now sat, ensconcedbetween them, chattering alternately in French and broken English;absorbing not only the young ladies’ attention, but that of Mrs. Eshtonand Lady Lynn, and getting spoilt to her heart’s content.At last coffee is brought in, and the gentlemen are summoned. I sit inthe shade—if any shade there be in this brilliantly-lit apartment; thewindow-curtain half hides me. Again the arch yawns; they come. Thecollective appearance of the gentlemen, like that of the ladies, isvery imposing: they are all costumed in black; most of them are tall,some young. Henry and Frederick Lynn are very dashing sparks indeed;and Colonel Dent is a fine soldierly man. Mr. Eshton, the magistrate ofthe district, is gentleman-like: his hair is quite white, his eyebrowsand whiskers still dark, which gives him something of the appearance ofa “père noble de théâtre.” Lord Ingram, like his sisters, is very tall;like them, also, he is handsome; but he shares Mary’s apathetic andlistless look: he seems to have more length of limb than vivacity ofblood or vigour of brain.And where is Mr. Rochester?He comes in last: I am not looking at the arch, yet I see him enter. Itry to concentrate my attention on those netting-needles, on the meshesof the purse I am forming—I wish to think only of the work I have in myhands, to see only the silver beads and silk threads that lie in mylap; whereas, I distinctly behold his figure, and I inevitably recallthe moment when I last saw it; just after I had rendered him, what hedeemed, an essential service, and he, holding my hand, and looking downon my face, surveyed me with eyes that revealed a heart full and eagerto overflow; in whose emotions I had a part. How near had I approachedhim at that moment! What had occurred since, calculated to change hisand my relative positions? Yet now, how distant, how far estranged wewere! So far estranged, that I did not expect him to come and speak tome. I did not wonder, when, without looking at me, he took a seat atthe other side of the room, and began conversing with some of theladies.No sooner did I see that his attention was riveted on them, and that Imight gaze without being observed, than my eyes were drawninvoluntarily to his face; I could not keep their lids under control:they would rise, and the irids would fix on him. I looked, and had anacute pleasure in looking,—a precious yet poignant pleasure; pure gold,with a steely point of agony: a pleasure like what the thirst-perishingman might feel who knows the well to which he has crept is poisoned,yet stoops and drinks divine draughts nevertheless.Most true is it that “beauty is in the eye of the gazer.” My master’scolourless, olive face, square, massive brow, broad and jetty eyebrows,deep eyes, strong features, firm, grim mouth,—all energy, decision,will,—were not beautiful, according to rule; but they were more thanbeautiful to me; they were full of an interest, an influence that quitemastered me,—that took my feelings from my own power and fettered themin his. I had not intended to love him; the reader knows I had wroughthard to extirpate from my soul the germs of love there detected; andnow, at the first renewed view of him, they spontaneously arrived,green and strong! He made me love him without looking at me.I compared him with his guests. What was the gallant grace of theLynns, the languid elegance of Lord Ingram,—even the militarydistinction of Colonel Dent, contrasted with his look of native pithand genuine power? I had no sympathy in their appearance, theirexpression: yet I could imagine that most observers would call themattractive, handsome, imposing; while they would pronounce Mr.Rochester at once harsh-featured and melancholy-looking. I saw themsmile, laugh—it was nothing; the light of the candles had as much soulin it as their smile; the tinkle of the bell as much significance astheir laugh. I saw Mr. Rochester smile:—his stern features softened;his eye grew both brilliant and gentle, its ray both searching andsweet. He was talking, at the moment, to Louisa and Amy Eshton. Iwondered to see them receive with calm that look which seemed to me sopenetrating: I expected their eyes to fall, their colour to rise underit; yet I was glad when I found they were in no sense moved. “He is notto them what he is to me,” I thought: “he is not of their kind. Ibelieve he is of mine;—I am sure he is—I feel akin to him—I understandthe language of his countenance and movements: though rank and wealthsever us widely, I have something in my brain and heart, in my bloodand nerves, that assimilates me mentally to him. Did I say, a few dayssince, that I had nothing to do with him but to receive my salary athis hands? Did I forbid myself to think of him in any other light thanas a paymaster? Blasphemy against nature! Every good, true, vigorousfeeling I have gathers impulsively round him. I know I must conceal mysentiments: I must smother hope; I must remember that he cannot caremuch for me. For when I say that I am of his kind, I do not mean that Ihave his force to influence, and his spell to attract; I mean only thatI have certain tastes and feelings in common with him. I must, then,repeat continually that we are for ever sundered:—and yet, while Ibreathe and think, I must love him.”Coffee is handed. The ladies, since the gentlemen entered, have becomelively as larks; conversation waxes brisk and merry. Colonel Dent andMr. Eshton argue on politics; their wives listen. The two prouddowagers, Lady Lynn and Lady Ingram, confabulate together. SirGeorge—whom, by-the-bye, I have forgotten to describe,—a very big, andvery fresh-looking country gentleman, stands before their sofa,coffee-cup in hand, and occasionally puts in a word. Mr. Frederick Lynnhas taken a seat beside Mary Ingram, and is showing her the engravingsof a splendid volume: she looks, smiles now and then, but apparentlysays little. The tall and phlegmatic Lord Ingram leans with folded armson the chair-back of the little and lively Amy Eshton; she glances upat him, and chatters like a wren: she likes him better than she doesMr. Rochester. Henry Lynn has taken possession of an ottoman at thefeet of Louisa: Adèle shares it with him: he is trying to talk Frenchwith her, and Louisa laughs at his blunders. With whom will BlancheIngram pair? She is standing alone at the table, bending gracefullyover an album. She seems waiting to be sought; but she will not waittoo long: she herself selects a mate.Mr. Rochester, having quitted the Eshtons, stands on the hearth assolitary as she stands by the table: she confronts him, taking herstation on the opposite side of the mantelpiece.“Mr. Rochester, I thought you were not fond of children?”“Nor am I.”“Then, what induced you to take charge of such a little doll as that?”(pointing to Adèle). “Where did you pick her up?”“I did not pick her up; she was left on my hands.”“You should have sent her to school.”“I could not afford it: schools are so dear.”“Why, I suppose you have a governess for her: I saw a person with herjust now—is she gone? Oh, no! there she is still, behind thewindow-curtain. You pay her, of course; I should think it quite asexpensive,—more so; for you have them both to keep in addition.”I feared—or should I say, hoped?—the allusion to me would make Mr.Rochester glance my way; and I involuntarily shrank farther into theshade: but he never turned his eyes.“I have not considered the subject,” said he indifferently, lookingstraight before him.“No, you men never do consider economy and common sense. You shouldhear mama on the chapter of governesses: Mary and I have had, I shouldthink, a dozen at least in our day; half of them detestable and therest ridiculous, and all incubi—were they not, mama?”“Did you speak, my own?”The young lady thus claimed as the dowager’s special property,reiterated her question with an explanation.“My dearest, don’t mention governesses; the word makes me nervous. Ihave suffered a martyrdom from their incompetency and caprice. I thankHeaven I have now done with them!”Mrs. Dent here bent over to the pious lady and whispered something inher ear; I suppose, from the answer elicited, it was a reminder thatone of the anathematised race was present.“Tant pis!” said her Ladyship, “I hope it may do her good!” Then, in alower tone, but still loud enough for me to hear, “I noticed her; I ama judge of physiognomy, and in hers I see all the faults of her class.”“What are they, madam?” inquired Mr. Rochester aloud.“I will tell you in your private ear,” replied she, wagging her turbanthree times with portentous significancy.“But my curiosity will be past its appetite; it craves food now.”“Ask Blanche; she is nearer you than I.”“Oh, don’t refer him to me, mama! I have just one word to say of thewhole tribe; they are a nuisance. Not that I ever suffered much fromthem; I took care to turn the tables. What tricks Theodore and I usedto play on our Miss Wilsons, and Mrs. Greys, and Madame Jouberts! Marywas always too sleepy to join in a plot with spirit. The best fun waswith Madame Joubert: Miss Wilson was a poor sickly thing, lachrymoseand low-spirited, not worth the trouble of vanquishing, in short; andMrs. Grey was coarse and insensible; no blow took effect on her. Butpoor Madame Joubert! I see her yet in her raging passions, when we haddriven her to extremities—spilt our tea, crumbled our bread and butter,tossed our books up to the ceiling, and played a charivari with theruler and desk, the fender and fire-irons. Theodore, do you rememberthose merry days?”“Yaas, to be sure I do,” drawled Lord Ingram; “and the poor old stickused to cry out ‘Oh you villains childs!’—and then we sermonised her onthe presumption of attempting to teach such clever blades as we were,when she was herself so ignorant.”“We did; and, Tedo, you know, I helped you in prosecuting (orpersecuting) your tutor, whey-faced Mr. Vining—the parson in the pip,as we used to call him. He and Miss Wilson took the liberty of fallingin love with each other—at least Tedo and I thought so; we surprisedsundry tender glances and sighs which we interpreted as tokens of ‘labelle passion,’ and I promise you the public soon had the benefit ofour discovery; we employed it as a sort of lever to hoist ourdead-weights from the house. Dear mama, there, as soon as she got aninkling of the business, found out that it was of an immoral tendency.Did you not, my lady-mother?”“Certainly, my best. And I was quite right: depend on that: there are athousand reasons why liaisons between governesses and tutors shouldnever be tolerated a moment in any well-regulated house; firstly—”“Oh, gracious, mama! Spare us the enumeration! _Au reste_, we all knowthem: danger of bad example to innocence of childhood; distractions andconsequent neglect of duty on the part of the attached—mutual allianceand reliance; confidence thence resulting—insolence accompanying—mutinyand general blow-up. Am I right, Baroness Ingram, of Ingram Park?”“My lily-flower, you are right now, as always.”“Then no more need be said: change the subject.”Amy Eshton, not hearing or not heeding this dictum, joined in with hersoft, infantine tone: “Louisa and I used to quiz our governess too; butshe was such a good creature, she would bear anything: nothing put herout. She was never cross with us; was she, Louisa?”“No, never: we might do what we pleased; ransack her desk and herworkbox, and turn her drawers inside out; and she was so good-natured,she would give us anything we asked for.”“I suppose, now,” said Miss Ingram, curling her lip sarcastically, “weshall have an abstract of the memoirs of all the governesses extant: inorder to avert such a visitation, I again move the introduction of anew topic. Mr. Rochester, do you second my motion?”“Madam, I support you on this point, as on every other.”“Then on me be the onus of bringing it forward. Signior Eduardo, areyou in voice to-night?”“Donna Bianca, if you command it, I will be.”“Then, signior, I lay on you my sovereign behest to furbish up yourlungs and other vocal organs, as they will be wanted on my royalservice.”“Who would not be the Rizzio of so divine a Mary?”“A fig for Rizzio!” cried she, tossing her head with all its curls, asshe moved to the piano. “It is my opinion the fiddler David must havebeen an insipid sort of fellow; I like black Bothwell better: to mymind a man is nothing without a spice of the devil in him; and historymay say what it will of James Hepburn, but I have a notion, he was justthe sort of wild, fierce, bandit hero whom I could have consented togift with my hand.”“Gentlemen, you hear! Now which of you most resembles Bothwell?” criedMr. Rochester.“I should say the preference lies with you,” responded Colonel Dent.“On my honour, I am much obliged to you,” was the reply.Miss Ingram, who had now seated herself with proud grace at the piano,spreading out her snowy robes in queenly amplitude, commenced abrilliant prelude; talking meantime. She appeared to be on her highhorse to-night; both her words and her air seemed intended to excitenot only the admiration, but the amazement of her auditors: she wasevidently bent on striking them as something very dashing and daringindeed.“Oh, I am so sick of the young men of the present day!” exclaimed she,rattling away at the instrument. “Poor, puny things, not fit to stir astep beyond papa’s park gates: nor to go even so far without mama’spermission and guardianship! Creatures so absorbed in care about theirpretty faces, and their white hands, and their small feet; as if a manhad anything to do with beauty! As if loveliness were not the specialprerogative of woman—her legitimate appanage and heritage! I grant anugly _woman_ is a blot on the fair face of creation; but as to the_gentlemen_, let them be solicitous to possess only strength andvalour: let their motto be:—Hunt, shoot, and fight: the rest is notworth a fillip. Such should be my device, were I a man.”“Whenever I marry,” she continued after a pause which none interrupted,“I am resolved my husband shall not be a rival, but a foil to me. Iwill suffer no competitor near the throne; I shall exact an undividedhomage: his devotions shall not be shared between me and the shape hesees in his mirror. Mr. Rochester, now sing, and I will play for you.”“I am all obedience,” was the response.“Here then is a Corsair-song. Know that I doat on Corsairs; and forthat reason, sing it _con spirito_.”“Commands from Miss Ingram’s lips would put spirit into a mug of milkand water.”“Take care, then: if you don’t please me, I will shame you by showinghow such things _should_ be done.”“That is offering a premium on incapacity: I shall now endeavour tofail.”“Gardez-vous en bien! If you err wilfully, I shall devise aproportionate punishment.”“Miss Ingram ought to be clement, for she has it in her power toinflict a chastisement beyond mortal endurance.”“Ha! explain!” commanded the lady.“Pardon me, madam: no need of explanation; your own fine sense mustinform you that one of your frowns would be a sufficient substitute forcapital punishment.”“Sing!” said she, and again touching the piano, she commenced anaccompaniment in spirited style.“Now is my time to slip away,” thought I: but the tones that thensevered the air arrested me. Mrs. Fairfax had said Mr. Rochesterpossessed a fine voice: he did—a mellow, powerful bass, into which hethrew his own feeling, his own force; finding a way through the ear tothe heart, and there waking sensation strangely. I waited till the lastdeep and full vibration had expired—till the tide of talk, checked aninstant, had resumed its flow; I then quitted my sheltered corner andmade my exit by the side-door, which was fortunately near. Thence anarrow passage led into the hall: in crossing it, I perceived my sandalwas loose; I stopped to tie it, kneeling down for that purpose on themat at the foot of the staircase. I heard the dining-room door unclose;a gentleman came out; rising hastily, I stood face to face with him: itwas Mr. Rochester.“How do you do?” he asked.“I am very well, sir.”“Why did you not come and speak to me in the room?”I thought I might have retorted the question on him who put it: but Iwould not take that freedom. I answered—“I did not wish to disturb you, as you seemed engaged, sir.”“What have you been doing during my absence?”“Nothing particular; teaching Adèle as usual.”“And getting a good deal paler than you were—as I saw at first sight.What is the matter?”“Nothing at all, sir.”“Did you take any cold that night you half drowned me?”“Not the least.”“Return to the drawing-room: you are deserting too early.”“I am tired, sir.”He looked at me for a minute.“And a little depressed,” he said. “What about? Tell me.”“Nothing—nothing, sir. I am not depressed.”“But I affirm that you are: so much depressed that a few more wordswould bring tears to your eyes—indeed, they are there now, shining andswimming; and a bead has slipped from the lash and fallen on to theflag. If I had time, and was not in mortal dread of some prating prigof a servant passing, I would know what all this means. Well, to-nightI excuse you; but understand that so long as my visitors stay, I expectyou to appear in the drawing-room every evening; it is my wish; don’tneglect it. Now go, and send Sophie for Adèle. Good-night, my—” Hestopped, bit his lip, and abruptly left me.CHAPTER XVIIIMerry days were these at Thornfield Hall; and busy days too: howdifferent from the first three months of stillness, monotony, andsolitude I had passed beneath its roof! All sad feelings seemed nowdriven from the house, all gloomy associations forgotten: there waslife everywhere, movement all day long. You could not now traverse thegallery, once so hushed, nor enter the front chambers, once sotenantless, without encountering a smart lady’s-maid or a dandy valet.The kitchen, the butler’s pantry, the servants’ hall, the entrancehall, were equally alive; and the saloons were only left void and stillwhen the blue sky and halcyon sunshine of the genial spring weathercalled their occupants out into the grounds. Even when that weather wasbroken, and continuous rain set in for some days, no damp seemed castover enjoyment: indoor amusements only became more lively and varied,in consequence of the stop put to outdoor gaiety.I wondered what they were going to do the first evening a change ofentertainment was proposed: they spoke of “playing charades,” but in myignorance I did not understand the term. The servants were called in,the dining-room tables wheeled away, the lights otherwise disposed, thechairs placed in a semicircle opposite the arch. While Mr. Rochesterand the other gentlemen directed these alterations, the ladies wererunning up and down stairs ringing for their maids. Mrs. Fairfax wassummoned to give information respecting the resources of the house inshawls, dresses, draperies of any kind; and certain wardrobes of thethird storey were ransacked, and their contents, in the shape ofbrocaded and hooped petticoats, satin sacques, black modes, lacelappets, &c., were brought down in armfuls by the abigails; then aselection was made, and such things as were chosen were carried to theboudoir within the drawing-room.Meantime, Mr. Rochester had again summoned the ladies round him, andwas selecting certain of their number to be of his party. “Miss Ingramis mine, of course,” said he: afterwards he named the two MissesEshton, and Mrs. Dent. He looked at me: I happened to be near him, as Ihad been fastening the clasp of Mrs. Dent’s bracelet, which had gotloose.“Will you play?” he asked. I shook my head. He did not insist, which Irather feared he would have done; he allowed me to return quietly to myusual seat.He and his aids now withdrew behind the curtain: the other party, whichwas headed by Colonel Dent, sat down on the crescent of chairs. One ofthe gentlemen, Mr. Eshton, observing me, seemed to propose that Ishould be asked to join them; but Lady Ingram instantly negatived thenotion.“No,” I heard her say: “she looks too stupid for any game of the sort.”Ere long a bell tinkled, and the curtain drew up. Within the arch, thebulky figure of Sir George Lynn, whom Mr. Rochester had likewisechosen, was seen enveloped in a white sheet: before him, on a table,lay open a large book; and at his side stood Amy Eshton, draped in Mr.Rochester’s cloak, and holding a book in her hand. Somebody, unseen,rang the bell merrily; then Adèle (who had insisted on being one of herguardian’s party), bounded forward, scattering round her the contentsof a basket of flowers she carried on her arm. Then appeared themagnificent figure of Miss Ingram, clad in white, a long veil on herhead, and a wreath of roses round her brow; by her side walked Mr.Rochester, and together they drew near the table. They knelt; whileMrs. Dent and Louisa Eshton, dressed also in white, took up theirstations behind them. A ceremony followed, in dumb show, in which itwas easy to recognise the pantomime of a marriage. At its termination,Colonel Dent and his party consulted in whispers for two minutes, thenthe Colonel called out—“Bride!” Mr. Rochester bowed, and the curtain fell.A considerable interval elapsed before it again rose. Its second risingdisplayed a more elaborately prepared scene than the last. Thedrawing-room, as I have before observed, was raised two steps above thedining-room, and on the top of the upper step, placed a yard or twoback within the room, appeared a large marble basin, which I recognisedas an ornament of the conservatory—where it usually stood, surroundedby exotics, and tenanted by gold fish—and whence it must have beentransported with some trouble, on account of its size and weight.Seated on the carpet, by the side of this basin, was seen Mr.Rochester, costumed in shawls, with a turban on his head. His dark eyesand swarthy skin and Paynim features suited the costume exactly: helooked the very model of an Eastern emir, an agent or a victim of thebowstring. Presently advanced into view Miss Ingram. She, too, wasattired in oriental fashion: a crimson scarf tied sash-like round thewaist: an embroidered handkerchief knotted about her temples; herbeautifully-moulded arms bare, one of them upraised in the act ofsupporting a pitcher, poised gracefully on her head. Both her cast ofform and feature, her complexion and her general air, suggested theidea of some Israelitish princess of the patriarchal days; and such wasdoubtless the character she intended to represent.She approached the basin, and bent over it as if to fill her pitcher;she again lifted it to her head. The personage on the well-brink nowseemed to accost her; to make some request:—“She hasted, let down herpitcher on her hand, and gave him to drink.” From the bosom of his robehe then produced a casket, opened it and showed magnificent braceletsand earrings; she acted astonishment and admiration; kneeling, he laidthe treasure at her feet; incredulity and delight were expressed by herlooks and gestures; the stranger fastened the bracelets on her arms andthe rings in her ears. It was Eliezer and Rebecca: the camels only werewanting.The divining party again laid their heads together: apparently theycould not agree about the word or syllable the scene illustrated.Colonel Dent, their spokesman, demanded “the tableau of the whole;”whereupon the curtain again descended.On its third rising only a portion of the drawing-room was disclosed;the rest being concealed by a screen, hung with some sort of dark andcoarse drapery. The marble basin was removed; in its place, stood adeal table and a kitchen chair: these objects were visible by a verydim light proceeding from a horn lantern, the wax candles being allextinguished.Amidst this sordid scene, sat a man with his clenched hands resting onhis knees, and his eyes bent on the ground. I knew Mr. Rochester;though the begrimed face, the disordered dress (his coat hanging loosefrom one arm, as if it had been almost torn from his back in ascuffle), the desperate and scowling countenance, the rough, bristlinghair might well have disguised him. As he moved, a chain clanked; tohis wrists were attached fetters.“Bridewell!” exclaimed Colonel Dent, and the charade was solved.A sufficient interval having elapsed for the performers to resume theirordinary costume, they re-entered the dining-room. Mr. Rochester led inMiss Ingram; she was complimenting him on his acting.“Do you know,” said she, “that, of the three characters, I liked you inthe last best? Oh, had you but lived a few years earlier, what agallant gentleman-highwayman you would have made!”“Is all the soot washed from my face?” he asked, turning it towardsher.“Alas! yes: the more’s the pity! Nothing could be more becoming to yourcomplexion than that ruffian’s rouge.”“You would like a hero of the road then?”“An English hero of the road would be the next best thing to an Italianbandit; and that could only be surpassed by a Levantine pirate.”“Well, whatever I am, remember you are my wife; we were married an hoursince, in the presence of all these witnesses.” She giggled, and hercolour rose.“Now, Dent,” continued Mr. Rochester, “it is your turn.” And as theother party withdrew, he and his band took the vacated seats. MissIngram placed herself at her leader’s right hand; the other divinersfilled the chairs on each side of him and her. I did not now watch theactors; I no longer waited with interest for the curtain to rise; myattention was absorbed by the spectators; my eyes, erewhile fixed onthe arch, were now irresistibly attracted to the semicircle of chairs.What charade Colonel Dent and his party played, what word they chose,how they acquitted themselves, I no longer remember; but I still seethe consultation which followed each scene: I see Mr. Rochester turn toMiss Ingram, and Miss Ingram to him; I see her incline her head towardshim, till the jetty curls almost touch his shoulder and wave againsthis cheek; I hear their mutual whisperings; I recall their interchangedglances; and something even of the feeling roused by the spectaclereturns in memory at this moment.I have told you, reader, that I had learnt to love Mr. Rochester: Icould not unlove him now, merely because I found that he had ceased tonotice me—because I might pass hours in his presence, and he wouldnever once turn his eyes in my direction—because I saw all hisattentions appropriated by a great lady, who scorned to touch me withthe hem of her robes as she passed; who, if ever her dark and imperiouseye fell on me by chance, would withdraw it instantly as from an objecttoo mean to merit observation. I could not unlove him, because I feltsure he would soon marry this very lady—because I read daily in her aproud security in his intentions respecting her—because I witnessedhourly in him a style of courtship which, if careless and choosingrather to be sought than to seek, was yet, in its very carelessness,captivating, and in its very pride, irresistible.There was nothing to cool or banish love in these circumstances, thoughmuch to create despair. Much too, you will think, reader, to engenderjealousy: if a woman, in my position, could presume to be jealous of awoman in Miss Ingram’s. But I was not jealous: or very rarely;—thenature of the pain I suffered could not be explained by that word. MissIngram was a mark beneath jealousy: she was too inferior to excite thefeeling. Pardon the seeming paradox; I mean what I say. She was veryshowy, but she was not genuine: she had a fine person, many brilliantattainments; but her mind was poor, her heart barren by nature: nothingbloomed spontaneously on that soil; no unforced natural fruit delightedby its freshness. She was not good; she was not original: she used torepeat sounding phrases from books: she never offered, nor had, anopinion of her own. She advocated a high tone of sentiment; but she didnot know the sensations of sympathy and pity; tenderness and truth werenot in her. Too often she betrayed this, by the undue vent she gave toa spiteful antipathy she had conceived against little Adèle: pushingher away with some contumelious epithet if she happened to approachher; sometimes ordering her from the room, and always treating her withcoldness and acrimony. Other eyes besides mine watched thesemanifestations of character—watched them closely, keenly, shrewdly.Yes; the future bridegroom, Mr. Rochester himself, exercised over hisintended a ceaseless surveillance; and it was from this sagacity—thisguardedness of his—this perfect, clear consciousness of his fair one’sdefects—this obvious absence of passion in his sentiments towards her,that my ever-torturing pain arose.I saw he was going to marry her, for family, perhaps political reasons,because her rank and connections suited him; I felt he had not givenher his love, and that her qualifications were ill adapted to win fromhim that treasure. This was the point—this was where the nerve wastouched and teased—this was where the fever was sustained and fed: _shecould not charm him_.If she had managed the victory at once, and he had yielded andsincerely laid his heart at her feet, I should have covered my face,turned to the wall, and (figuratively) have died to them. If MissIngram had been a good and noble woman, endowed with force, fervour,kindness, sense, I should have had one vital struggle with twotigers—jealousy and despair: then, my heart torn out and devoured, Ishould have admired her—acknowledged her excellence, and been quiet forthe rest of my days: and the more absolute her superiority, the deeperwould have been my admiration—the more truly tranquil my quiescence.But as matters really stood, to watch Miss Ingram’s efforts atfascinating Mr. Rochester, to witness their repeated failure—herselfunconscious that they did fail; vainly fancying that each shaftlaunched hit the mark, and infatuatedly pluming herself on success,when her pride and self-complacency repelled further and further whatshe wished to allure—to witness _this_, was to be at once underceaseless excitation and ruthless restraint.Because, when she failed, I saw how she might have succeeded. Arrowsthat continually glanced off from Mr. Rochester’s breast and fellharmless at his feet, might, I knew, if shot by a surer hand, havequivered keen in his proud heart—have called love into his stern eye,and softness into his sardonic face; or, better still, without weaponsa silent conquest might have been won.“Why can she not influence him more, when she is privileged to draw sonear to him?” I asked myself. “Surely she cannot truly like him, or notlike him with true affection! If she did, she need not coin her smilesso lavishly, flash her glances so unremittingly, manufacture airs soelaborate, graces so multitudinous. It seems to me that she might, bymerely sitting quietly at his side, saying little and looking less, getnigher his heart. I have seen in his face a far different expressionfrom that which hardens it now while she is so vivaciously accostinghim; but then it came of itself: it was not elicited by meretriciousarts and calculated manoeuvres; and one had but to accept it—to answerwhat he asked without pretension, to address him when needful withoutgrimace—and it increased and grew kinder and more genial, and warmedone like a fostering sunbeam. How will she manage to please him whenthey are married? I do not think she will manage it; and yet it mightbe managed; and his wife might, I verily believe, be the very happiestwoman the sun shines on.”I have not yet said anything condemnatory of Mr. Rochester’s project ofmarrying for interest and connections. It surprised me when I firstdiscovered that such was his intention: I had thought him a manunlikely to be influenced by motives so commonplace in his choice of awife; but the longer I considered the position, education, &c., of theparties, the less I felt justified in judging and blaming either him orMiss Ingram for acting in conformity to ideas and principles instilledinto them, doubtless, from their childhood. All their class held theseprinciples: I supposed, then, they had reasons for holding them such asI could not fathom. It seemed to me that, were I a gentleman like him,I would take to my bosom only such a wife as I could love; but the veryobviousness of the advantages to the husband’s own happiness offered bythis plan convinced me that there must be arguments against its generaladoption of which I was quite ignorant: otherwise I felt sure all theworld would act as I wished to act.But in other points, as well as this, I was growing very lenient to mymaster: I was forgetting all his faults, for which I had once kept asharp look-out. It had formerly been my endeavour to study all sides ofhis character: to take the bad with the good; and from the justweighing of both, to form an equitable judgment. Now I saw no bad. Thesarcasm that had repelled, the harshness that had startled me once,were only like keen condiments in a choice dish: their presence waspungent, but their absence would be felt as comparatively insipid. Andas for the vague something—was it a sinister or a sorrowful, adesigning or a desponding expression?—that opened upon a carefulobserver, now and then, in his eye, and closed again before one couldfathom the strange depth partially disclosed; that something which usedto make me fear and shrink, as if I had been wandering amongstvolcanic-looking hills, and had suddenly felt the ground quiver andseen it gape: that something, I, at intervals, beheld still; and withthrobbing heart, but not with palsied nerves. Instead of wishing toshun, I longed only to dare—to divine it; and I thought Miss Ingramhappy, because one day she might look into the abyss at her leisure,explore its secrets and analyse their nature.Meantime, while I thought only of my master and his future bride—sawonly them, heard only their discourse, and considered only theirmovements of importance—the rest of the party were occupied with theirown separate interests and pleasures. The Ladies Lynn and Ingramcontinued to consort in solemn conferences, where they nodded their twoturbans at each other, and held up their four hands in confrontinggestures of surprise, or mystery, or horror, according to the theme onwhich their gossip ran, like a pair of magnified puppets. Mild Mrs.Dent talked with good-natured Mrs. Eshton; and the two sometimesbestowed a courteous word or smile on me. Sir George Lynn, ColonelDent, and Mr. Eshton discussed politics, or county affairs, or justicebusiness. Lord Ingram flirted with Amy Eshton; Louisa played and sangto and with one of the Messrs. Lynn; and Mary Ingram listened languidlyto the gallant speeches of the other. Sometimes all, as with oneconsent, suspended their by-play to observe and listen to the principalactors: for, after all, Mr. Rochester and—because closely connectedwith him—Miss Ingram were the life and soul of the party. If he wasabsent from the room an hour, a perceptible dulness seemed to stealover the spirits of his guests; and his re-entrance was sure to give afresh impulse to the vivacity of conversation.The want of his animating influence appeared to be peculiarly felt oneday that he had been summoned to Millcote on business, and was notlikely to return till late. The afternoon was wet: a walk the party hadproposed to take to see a gipsy camp, lately pitched on a common beyondHay, was consequently deferred. Some of the gentlemen were gone to thestables: the younger ones, together with the younger ladies, wereplaying billiards in the billiard-room. The dowagers Ingram and Lynnsought solace in a quiet game at cards. Blanche Ingram, after havingrepelled, by supercilious taciturnity, some efforts of Mrs. Dent andMrs. Eshton to draw her into conversation, had first murmured over somesentimental tunes and airs on the piano, and then, having fetched anovel from the library, had flung herself in haughty listlessness on asofa, and prepared to beguile, by the spell of fiction, the tedioushours of absence. The room and the house were silent: only now and thenthe merriment of the billiard-players was heard from above.It was verging on dusk, and the clock had already given warning of thehour to dress for dinner, when little Adèle, who knelt by me in thedrawing-room window-seat, suddenly exclaimed—“Voilà Monsieur Rochester, qui revient!”I turned, and Miss Ingram darted forwards from her sofa: the others,too, looked up from their several occupations; for at the same time acrunching of wheels and a splashing tramp of horse-hoofs became audibleon the wet gravel. A post-chaise was approaching.“What can possess him to come home in that style?” said Miss Ingram.“He rode Mesrour (the black horse), did he not, when he went out? andPilot was with him:—what has he done with the animals?”As she said this, she approached her tall person and ample garments sonear the window, that I was obliged to bend back almost to the breakingof my spine: in her eagerness she did not observe me at first, but whenshe did, she curled her lip and moved to another casement. Thepost-chaise stopped; the driver rang the door-bell, and a gentlemanalighted attired in travelling garb; but it was not Mr. Rochester; itwas a tall, fashionable-looking man, a stranger.“How provoking!” exclaimed Miss Ingram: “you tiresome monkey!”(apostrophising Adèle), “who perched you up in the window to give falseintelligence?” and she cast on me an angry glance, as if I were infault.Some parleying was audible in the hall, and soon the new-comer entered.He bowed to Lady Ingram, as deeming her the eldest lady present.“It appears I come at an inopportune time, madam,” said he, “when myfriend, Mr. Rochester, is from home; but I arrive from a very longjourney, and I think I may presume so far on old and intimateacquaintance as to instal myself here till he returns.”His manner was polite; his accent, in speaking, struck me as beingsomewhat unusual,—not precisely foreign, but still not altogetherEnglish: his age might be about Mr. Rochester’s,—between thirty andforty; his complexion was singularly sallow: otherwise he was afine-looking man, at first sight especially. On closer examination, youdetected something in his face that displeased, or rather that failedto please. His features were regular, but too relaxed: his eye waslarge and well cut, but the life looking out of it was a tame, vacantlife—at least so I thought.The sound of the dressing-bell dispersed the party. It was not tillafter dinner that I saw him again: he then seemed quite at his ease.But I liked his physiognomy even less than before: it struck me asbeing at the same time unsettled and inanimate. His eye wandered, andhad no meaning in its wandering: this gave him an odd look, such as Inever remembered to have seen. For a handsome and not anunamiable-looking man, he repelled me exceedingly: there was no powerin that smooth-skinned face of a full oval shape: no firmness in thataquiline nose and small cherry mouth; there was no thought on the low,even forehead; no command in that blank, brown eye.As I sat in my usual nook, and looked at him with the light of thegirandoles on the mantelpiece beaming full over him—for he occupied anarm-chair drawn close to the fire, and kept shrinking still nearer, asif he were cold, I compared him with Mr. Rochester. I think (withdeference be it spoken) the contrast could not be much greater betweena sleek gander and a fierce falcon: between a meek sheep and therough-coated keen-eyed dog, its guardian.He had spoken of Mr. Rochester as an old friend. A curious friendshiptheirs must have been: a pointed illustration, indeed, of the old adagethat “extremes meet.”Two or three of the gentlemen sat near him, and I caught at timesscraps of their conversation across the room. At first I could not makemuch sense of what I heard; for the discourse of Louisa Eshton and MaryIngram, who sat nearer to me, confused the fragmentary sentences thatreached me at intervals. These last were discussing the stranger; theyboth called him “a beautiful man.” Louisa said he was “a love of acreature,” and she “adored him;” and Mary instanced his “pretty littlemouth, and nice nose,” as her ideal of the charming.“And what a sweet-tempered forehead he has!” cried Louisa,—“sosmooth—none of those frowning irregularities I dislike so much; andsuch a placid eye and smile!”And then, to my great relief, Mr. Henry Lynn summoned them to the otherside of the room, to settle some point about the deferred excursion toHay Common.I was now able to concentrate my attention on the group by the fire,and I presently gathered that the new-comer was called Mr. Mason; thenI learned that he was but just arrived in England, and that he camefrom some hot country: which was the reason, doubtless, his face was sosallow, and that he sat so near the hearth, and wore a surtout in thehouse. Presently the words Jamaica, Kingston, Spanish Town, indicatedthe West Indies as his residence; and it was with no little surprise Igathered, ere long, that he had there first seen and become acquaintedwith Mr. Rochester. He spoke of his friend’s dislike of the burningheats, the hurricanes, and rainy seasons of that region. I knew Mr.Rochester had been a traveller: Mrs. Fairfax had said so; but I thoughtthe continent of Europe had bounded his wanderings; till now I hadnever heard a hint given of visits to more distant shores.I was pondering these things, when an incident, and a somewhatunexpected one, broke the thread of my musings. Mr. Mason, shivering assome one chanced to open the door, asked for more coal to be put on thefire, which had burnt out its flame, though its mass of cinder stillshone hot and red. The footman who brought the coal, in going out,stopped near Mr. Eshton’s chair, and said something to him in a lowvoice, of which I heard only the words, “old woman,”—“quitetroublesome.”“Tell her she shall be put in the stocks if she does not take herselfoff,” replied the magistrate.“No—stop!” interrupted Colonel Dent. “Don’t send her away, Eshton; wemight turn the thing to account; better consult the ladies.” Andspeaking aloud, he continued—“Ladies, you talked of going to Hay Commonto visit the gipsy camp; Sam here says that one of the old MotherBunches is in the servants’ hall at this moment, and insists upon beingbrought in before ‘the quality,’ to tell them their fortunes. Would youlike to see her?”“Surely, colonel,” cried Lady Ingram, “you would not encourage such alow impostor? Dismiss her, by all means, at once!”“But I cannot persuade her to go away, my lady,” said the footman; “norcan any of the servants: Mrs. Fairfax is with her just now, entreatingher to be gone; but she has taken a chair in the chimney-corner, andsays nothing shall stir her from it till she gets leave to come inhere.”“What does she want?” asked Mrs. Eshton.“‘To tell the gentry their fortunes,’ she says, ma’am; and she swearsshe must and will do it.”“What is she like?” inquired the Misses Eshton, in a breath.“A shockingly ugly old creature, miss; almost as black as a crock.”“Why, she’s a real sorceress!” cried Frederick Lynn. “Let us have herin, of course.”“To be sure,” rejoined his brother; “it would be a thousand pities tothrow away such a chance of fun.”“My dear boys, what are you thinking about?” exclaimed Mrs. Lynn.“I cannot possibly countenance any such inconsistent proceeding,”chimed in the Dowager Ingram.“Indeed, mama, but you can—and will,” pronounced the haughty voice ofBlanche, as she turned round on the piano-stool; where till now she hadsat silent, apparently examining sundry sheets of music. “I have acuriosity to hear my fortune told: therefore, Sam, order the beldameforward.”“My darling Blanche! recollect—”“I do—I recollect all you can suggest; and I must have my will—quick,Sam!”“Yes—yes—yes!” cried all the juveniles, both ladies and gentlemen. “Lether come—it will be excellent sport!”The footman still lingered. “She looks such a rough one,” said he.“Go!” ejaculated Miss Ingram, and the man went.Excitement instantly seized the whole party: a running fire of railleryand jests was proceeding when Sam returned.“She won’t come now,” said he. “She says it’s not her mission to appearbefore the ‘vulgar herd’ (them’s her words). I must show her into aroom by herself, and then those who wish to consult her must go to herone by one.”“You see now, my queenly Blanche,” began Lady Ingram, “she encroaches.Be advised, my angel girl—and—”“Show her into the library, of course,” cut in the “angel girl.” “It isnot my mission to listen to her before the vulgar herd either: I meanto have her all to myself. Is there a fire in the library?”“Yes, ma’am—but she looks such a tinkler.”“Cease that chatter, blockhead! and do my bidding.”Again Sam vanished; and mystery, animation, expectation rose to fullflow once more.“She’s ready now,” said the footman, as he reappeared. “She wishes toknow who will be her first visitor.”“I think I had better just look in upon her before any of the ladiesgo,” said Colonel Dent.“Tell her, Sam, a gentleman is coming.”Sam went and returned.“She says, sir, that she’ll have no gentlemen; they need not troublethemselves to come near her; nor,” he added, with difficultysuppressing a titter, “any ladies either, except the young, andsingle.”“By Jove, she has taste!” exclaimed Henry Lynn.Miss Ingram rose solemnly: “I go first,” she said, in a tone whichmight have befitted the leader of a forlorn hope, mounting a breach inthe van of his men.“Oh, my best! oh, my dearest! pause—reflect!” was her mama’s cry; butshe swept past her in stately silence, passed through the door whichColonel Dent held open, and we heard her enter the library.A comparative silence ensued. Lady Ingram thought it “le cas” to wringher hands: which she did accordingly. Miss Mary declared she felt, forher part, she never dared venture. Amy and Louisa Eshton tittered undertheir breath, and looked a little frightened.The minutes passed very slowly: fifteen were counted before thelibrary-door again opened. Miss Ingram returned to us through the arch.Would she laugh? Would she take it as a joke? All eyes met her with aglance of eager curiosity, and she met all eyes with one of rebuff andcoldness; she looked neither flurried nor merry: she walked stiffly toher seat, and took it in silence.“Well, Blanche?” said Lord Ingram.“What did she say, sister?” asked Mary.“What did you think? How do you feel? Is she a real fortune-teller?”demanded the Misses Eshton.“Now, now, good people,” returned Miss Ingram, “don’t press upon me.Really your organs of wonder and credulity are easily excited: youseem, by the importance of you all—my good mama included—ascribe tothis matter, absolutely to believe we have a genuine witch in thehouse, who is in close alliance with the old gentleman. I have seen agipsy vagabond; she has practised in hackneyed fashion the science ofpalmistry and told me what such people usually tell. My whim isgratified; and now I think Mr. Eshton will do well to put the hag inthe stocks to-morrow morning, as he threatened.”Miss Ingram took a book, leant back in her chair, and so declinedfurther conversation. I watched her for nearly half-an-hour: during allthat time she never turned a page, and her face grew momently darker,more dissatisfied, and more sourly expressive of disappointment. Shehad obviously not heard anything to her advantage: and it seemed to me,from her prolonged fit of gloom and taciturnity, that she herself,notwithstanding her professed indifference, attached undue importanceto whatever revelations had been made her.During all that time she never turned a pageMeantime, Mary Ingram, Amy and Louisa Eshton, declared they dared notgo alone; and yet they all wished to go. A negotiation was openedthrough the medium of the ambassador, Sam; and after much pacing to andfro, till, I think, the said Sam’s calves must have ached with theexercise, permission was at last, with great difficulty, extorted fromthe rigorous Sibyl, for the three to wait upon her in a body.Their visit was not so still as Miss Ingram’s had been: we heardhysterical giggling and little shrieks proceeding from the library; andat the end of about twenty minutes they burst the door open, and camerunning across the hall, as if they were half-scared out of their wits.“I am sure she is something not right!” they cried, one and all. “Shetold us such things! She knows all about us!” and they sank breathlessinto the various seats the gentlemen hastened to bring them.Pressed for further explanation, they declared she had told them ofthings they had said and done when they were mere children; describedbooks and ornaments they had in their boudoirs at home: keepsakes thatdifferent relations had presented to them. They affirmed that she hadeven divined their thoughts, and had whispered in the ear of each thename of the person she liked best in the world, and informed them ofwhat they most wished for.Here the gentlemen interposed with earnest petitions to be furtherenlightened on these two last-named points; but they got only blushes,ejaculations, tremors, and titters, in return for their importunity.The matrons, meantime, offered vinaigrettes and wielded fans; and againand again reiterated the expression of their concern that their warninghad not been taken in time; and the elder gentlemen laughed, and theyounger urged their services on the agitated fair ones.In the midst of the tumult, and while my eyes and ears were fullyengaged in the scene before me, I heard a hem close at my elbow: Iturned, and saw Sam.“If you please, miss, the gipsy declares that there is another youngsingle lady in the room who has not been to her yet, and she swears shewill not go till she has seen all. I thought it must be you: there isno one else for it. What shall I tell her?”“Oh, I will go by all means,” I answered: and I was glad of theunexpected opportunity to gratify my much-excited curiosity. I slippedout of the room, unobserved by any eye—for the company were gathered inone mass about the trembling trio just returned—and I closed the doorquietly behind me.“If you like, miss,” said Sam, “I’ll wait in the hall for you; and ifshe frightens you, just call and I’ll come in.”“No, Sam, return to the kitchen: I am not in the least afraid.” Nor wasI; but I was a good deal interested and excited.CHAPTER XIXThe library looked tranquil enough as I entered it, and the Sibyl—ifSibyl she were—was seated snugly enough in an easy-chair at thechimney-corner. She had on a red cloak and a black bonnet: or rather, abroad-brimmed gipsy hat, tied down with a striped handkerchief underher chin. An extinguished candle stood on the table; she was bendingover the fire, and seemed reading in a little black book, like aprayer-book, by the light of the blaze: she muttered the words toherself, as most old women do, while she read; she did not desistimmediately on my entrance: it appeared she wished to finish aparagraph.I stood on the rug and warmed my hands, which were rather cold withsitting at a distance from the drawing-room fire. I felt now ascomposed as ever I did in my life: there was nothing indeed in thegipsy’s appearance to trouble one’s calm. She shut her book and slowlylooked up; her hat-brim partially shaded her face, yet I could see, asshe raised it, that it was a strange one. It looked all brown andblack: elf-locks bristled out from beneath a white band which passedunder her chin, and came half over her cheeks, or rather jaws: her eyeconfronted me at once, with a bold and direct gaze.“Well, and you want your fortune told?” she said, in a voice as decidedas her glance, as harsh as her features.“I don’t care about it, mother; you may please yourself: but I ought towarn you, I have no faith.”“It’s like your impudence to say so: I expected it of you; I heard itin your step as you crossed the threshold.”“Did you? You’ve a quick ear.”“I have; and a quick eye and a quick brain.”“You need them all in your trade.”“I do; especially when I’ve customers like you to deal with. Why don’tyou tremble?”“I’m not cold.”“Why don’t you turn pale?”“I am not sick.”“Why don’t you consult my art?”“I’m not silly.”The old crone “nichered” a laugh under her bonnet and bandage; she thendrew out a short black pipe, and lighting it began to smoke. Havingindulged a while in this sedative, she raised her bent body, took thepipe from her lips, and while gazing steadily at the fire, said verydeliberately—“You are cold; you are sick; and you are silly.”“Prove it,” I rejoined.“I will, in few words. You are cold, because you are alone: no contactstrikes the fire from you that is in you. You are sick; because thebest of feelings, the highest and the sweetest given to man, keeps faraway from you. You are silly, because, suffer as you may, you will notbeckon it to approach, nor will you stir one step to meet it where itwaits you.”She again put her short black pipe to her lips, and renewed her smokingwith vigour.“You might say all that to almost any one who you knew lived as asolitary dependent in a great house.”“I might say it to almost any one: but would it be true of almost anyone?”“In my circumstances.”“Yes; just so, in _your_ circumstances: but find me another preciselyplaced as you are.”“It would be easy to find you thousands.”“You could scarcely find me one. If you knew it, you are peculiarlysituated: very near happiness; yes, within reach of it. The materialsare all prepared; there only wants a movement to combine them. Chancelaid them somewhat apart; let them be once approached and blissresults.”“I don’t understand enigmas. I never could guess a riddle in my life.”“If you wish me to speak more plainly, show me your palm.”“And I must cross it with silver, I suppose?”“To be sure.”I gave her a shilling: she put it into an old stocking-foot which shetook out of her pocket, and having tied it round and returned it, shetold me to hold out my hand. I did. She approached her face to thepalm, and pored over it without touching it.“It is too fine,” said she. “I can make nothing of such a hand as that;almost without lines: besides, what is in a palm? Destiny is notwritten there.”“I believe you,” said I.“No,” she continued, “it is in the face: on the forehead, about theeyes, in the lines of the mouth. Kneel, and lift up your head.”“Ah! now you are coming to reality,” I said, as I obeyed her. “I shallbegin to put some faith in you presently.”I knelt within half a yard of her. She stirred the fire, so that aripple of light broke from the disturbed coal: the glare, however, asshe sat, only threw her face into deeper shadow: mine, it illumined.“I wonder with what feelings you came to me to-night,” she said, whenshe had examined me a while. “I wonder what thoughts are busy in yourheart during all the hours you sit in yonder room with the fine peopleflitting before you like shapes in a magic-lantern: just as littlesympathetic communion passing between you and them as if they werereally mere shadows of human forms, and not the actual substance.”“I feel tired often, sleepy sometimes, but seldom sad.”“Then you have some secret hope to buoy you up and please you withwhispers of the future?”“Not I. The utmost I hope is, to save money enough out of my earningsto set up a school some day in a little house rented by myself.”“A mean nutriment for the spirit to exist on: and sitting in thatwindow-seat (you see I know your habits)—”“You have learned them from the servants.”“Ah! you think yourself sharp. Well, perhaps I have: to speak truth, Ihave an acquaintance with one of them, Mrs. Poole—”I started to my feet when I heard the name.“You have—have you?” thought I; “there is diablerie in the businessafter all, then!”“Don’t be alarmed,” continued the strange being; “she’s a safe hand isMrs. Poole: close and quiet; any one may repose confidence in her. But,as I was saying: sitting in that window-seat, do you think of nothingbut your future school? Have you no present interest in any of thecompany who occupy the sofas and chairs before you? Is there not oneface you study? one figure whose movements you follow with at leastcuriosity?”“I like to observe all the faces and all the figures.”“But do you never single one from the rest—or it may be, two?”“I do frequently; when the gestures or looks of a pair seem telling atale: it amuses me to watch them.”“What tale do you like best to hear?”“Oh, I have not much choice! They generally run on the sametheme—courtship; and promise to end in the same catastrophe—marriage.”“And do you like that monotonous theme?”“Positively, I don’t care about it: it is nothing to me.”“Nothing to you? When a lady, young and full of life and health,charming with beauty and endowed with the gifts of rank and fortune,sits and smiles in the eyes of a gentleman you—”“I what?”“You know—and perhaps think well of.”“I don’t know the gentlemen here. I have scarcely interchanged asyllable with one of them; and as to thinking well of them, I considersome respectable, and stately, and middle-aged, and others young,dashing, handsome, and lively: but certainly they are all at liberty tobe the recipients of whose smiles they please, without my feelingdisposed to consider the transaction of any moment to me.”“You don’t know the gentlemen here? You have not exchanged a syllablewith one of them? Will you say that of the master of the house!”“He is not at home.”“A profound remark! A most ingenious quibble! He went to Millcote thismorning, and will be back here to-night or to-morrow: does thatcircumstance exclude him from the list of your acquaintance—blot him,as it were, out of existence?”“No; but I can scarcely see what Mr. Rochester has to do with the themeyou had introduced.”“I was talking of ladies smiling in the eyes of gentlemen; and of lateso many smiles have been shed into Mr. Rochester’s eyes that theyoverflow like two cups filled above the brim: have you never remarkedthat?”“Mr. Rochester has a right to enjoy the society of his guests.”“No question about his right: but have you never observed that, of allthe tales told here about matrimony, Mr. Rochester has been favouredwith the most lively and the most continuous?”“The eagerness of a listener quickens the tongue of a narrator.” I saidthis rather to myself than to the gipsy, whose strange talk, voice,manner, had by this time wrapped me in a kind of dream. One unexpectedsentence came from her lips after another, till I got involved in a webof mystification; and wondered what unseen spirit had been sitting forweeks by my heart watching its workings and taking record of everypulse.“Eagerness of a listener!” repeated she: “yes; Mr. Rochester has sat bythe hour, his ear inclined to the fascinating lips that took suchdelight in their task of communicating; and Mr. Rochester was sowilling to receive and looked so grateful for the pastime given him;you have noticed this?”“Grateful! I cannot remember detecting gratitude in his face.”“Detecting! You have analysed, then. And what did you detect, if notgratitude?”I said nothing.“You have seen love: have you not?—and, looking forward, you have seenhim married, and beheld his bride happy?”“Humph! Not exactly. Your witch’s skill is rather at fault sometimes.”“What the devil have you seen, then?”“Never mind: I came here to inquire, not to confess. Is it known thatMr. Rochester is to be married?”“Yes; and to the beautiful Miss Ingram.”“Shortly?”“Appearances would warrant that conclusion: and, no doubt (though, withan audacity that wants chastising out of you, you seem to question it),they will be a superlatively happy pair. He must love such a handsome,noble, witty, accomplished lady; and probably she loves him, or, if nothis person, at least his purse. I know she considers the Rochesterestate eligible to the last degree; though (God pardon me!) I told hersomething on that point about an hour ago which made her look wondrousgrave: the corners of her mouth fell half an inch. I would advise herblackaviced suitor to look out: if another comes, with a longer orclearer rent-roll,—he’s dished—”“But, mother, I did not come to hear Mr. Rochester’s fortune: I came tohear my own; and you have told me nothing of it.”“Your fortune is yet doubtful: when I examined your face, one traitcontradicted another. Chance has meted you a measure of happiness: thatI know. I knew it before I came here this evening. She has laid itcarefully on one side for you. I saw her do it. It depends on yourselfto stretch out your hand, and take it up: but whether you will do so,is the problem I study. Kneel again on the rug.”“Don’t keep me long; the fire scorches me.”She did not stoop towards me, but only gazed, leaning back in her chairI knelt. She did not stoop towards me, but only gazed, leaning back inher chair. She began muttering,—“The flame flickers in the eye; the eye shines like dew; it looks softand full of feeling; it smiles at my jargon: it is susceptible;impression follows impression through its clear sphere; where it ceasesto smile, it is sad; an unconscious lassitude weighs on the lid: thatsignifies melancholy resulting from loneliness. It turns from me; itwill not suffer further scrutiny; it seems to deny, by a mockingglance, the truth of the discoveries I have already made,—to disown thecharge both of sensibility and chagrin: its pride and reserve onlyconfirm me in my opinion. The eye is favourable.“As to the mouth, it delights at times in laughter; it is disposed toimpart all that the brain conceives; though I daresay it would besilent on much the heart experiences. Mobile and flexible, it was neverintended to be compressed in the eternal silence of solitude: it is amouth which should speak much and smile often, and have human affectionfor its interlocutor. That feature too is propitious.“I see no enemy to a fortunate issue but in the brow; and that browprofesses to say,—‘I can live alone, if self-respect, and circumstancesrequire me so to do. I need not sell my soul to buy bliss. I have aninward treasure born with me, which can keep me alive if all extraneousdelights should be withheld, or offered only at a price I cannot affordto give.’ The forehead declares, ‘Reason sits firm and holds the reins,and she will not let the feelings burst away and hurry her to wildchasms. The passions may rage furiously, like true heathens, as theyare; and the desires may imagine all sorts of vain things: but judgmentshall still have the last word in every argument, and the casting votein every decision. Strong wind, earthquake-shock, and fire may pass by:but I shall follow the guiding of that still small voice whichinterprets the dictates of conscience.’“Well said, forehead; your declaration shall be respected. I haveformed my plans—right plans I deem them—and in them I have attended tothe claims of conscience, the counsels of reason. I know how soon youthwould fade and bloom perish, if, in the cup of bliss offered, but onedreg of shame, or one flavour of remorse were detected; and I do notwant sacrifice, sorrow, dissolution—such is not my taste. I wish tofoster, not to blight—to earn gratitude, not to wring tears ofblood—no, nor of brine: my harvest must be in smiles, in endearments,in sweet—That will do. I think I rave in a kind of exquisite delirium.I should wish now to protract this moment _ad infinitum_; but I darenot. So far I have governed myself thoroughly. I have acted as Iinwardly swore I would act; but further might try me beyond mystrength. Rise, Miss Eyre: leave me; the play is played out’.”Where was I? Did I wake or sleep? Had I been dreaming? Did I dreamstill? The old woman’s voice had changed: her accent, her gesture, andall were familiar to me as my own face in a glass—as the speech of myown tongue. I got up, but did not go. I looked; I stirred the fire, andI looked again: but she drew her bonnet and her bandage closer abouther face, and again beckoned me to depart. The flame illuminated herhand stretched out: roused now, and on the alert for discoveries, I atonce noticed that hand. It was no more the withered limb of eld than myown; it was a rounded supple member, with smooth fingers, symmetricallyturned; a broad ring flashed on the little finger, and stoopingforward, I looked at it, and saw a gem I had seen a hundred timesbefore. Again I looked at the face; which was no longer turned fromme—on the contrary, the bonnet was doffed, the bandage displaced, thehead advanced.“Well, Jane, do you know me?” asked the familiar voice.“Only take off the red cloak, sir, and then—”“But the string is in a knot—help me.”“Break it, sir.”“There, then—‘Off, ye lendings!’” And Mr. Rochester stepped out of hisdisguise.“Now, sir, what a strange idea!”“But well carried out, eh? Don’t you think so?”“With the ladies you must have managed well.”“But not with you?”“You did not act the character of a gipsy with me.”“What character did I act? My own?”“No; some unaccountable one. In short, I believe you have been tryingto draw me out—or in; you have been talking nonsense to make me talknonsense. It is scarcely fair, sir.”“Do you forgive me, Jane?”“I cannot tell till I have thought it all over. If, on reflection, Ifind I have fallen into no great absurdity, I shall try to forgive you;but it was not right.”“Oh, you have been very correct—very careful, very sensible.”I reflected, and thought, on the whole, I had. It was a comfort; but,indeed, I had been on my guard almost from the beginning of theinterview. Something of masquerade I suspected. I knew gipsies andfortune-tellers did not express themselves as this seeming old womanhad expressed herself; besides I had noted her feigned voice, heranxiety to conceal her features. But my mind had been running on GracePoole—that living enigma, that mystery of mysteries, as I consideredher. I had never thought of Mr. Rochester.“Well,” said he, “what are you musing about? What does that grave smilesignify?”“Wonder and self-congratulation, sir. I have your permission to retirenow, I suppose?”“No; stay a moment; and tell me what the people in the drawing-roomyonder are doing.”“Discussing the gipsy, I daresay.”“Sit down!—Let me hear what they said about me.”“I had better not stay long, sir; it must be near eleven o’clock. Oh,are you aware, Mr. Rochester, that a stranger has arrived here sinceyou left this morning?”“A stranger!—no; who can it be? I expected no one; is he gone?”“No; he said he had known you long, and that he could take the libertyof installing himself here till you returned.”“The devil he did! Did he give his name?”“His name is Mason, sir; and he comes from the West Indies; fromSpanish Town, in Jamaica, I think.”Mr. Rochester was standing near me; he had taken my hand, as if to leadme to a chair. As I spoke he gave my wrist a convulsive grip; the smileon his lips froze: apparently a spasm caught his breath.“Mason!—the West Indies!” he said, in the tone one might fancy aspeaking automaton to enounce its single words; “Mason!—the WestIndies!” he reiterated; and he went over the syllables three times,growing, in the intervals of speaking, whiter than ashes: he hardlyseemed to know what he was doing.“Do you feel ill, sir?” I inquired.“Jane, I’ve got a blow; I’ve got a blow, Jane!” He staggered.“Oh, lean on me, sir.”“Jane, you offered me your shoulder once before; let me have it now.”“Yes, sir, yes; and my arm.”He sat down, and made me sit beside him. Holding my hand in both hisown, he chafed it; gazing on me, at the same time, with the mosttroubled and dreary look.“My little friend!” said he, “I wish I were in a quiet island with onlyyou; and trouble, and danger, and hideous recollections removed fromme.”“Can I help you, sir?—I’d give my life to serve you.”“Jane, if aid is wanted, I’ll seek it at your hands; I promise youthat.”“Thank you, sir. Tell me what to do,—I’ll try, at least, to do it.”“Fetch me now, Jane, a glass of wine from the dining-room: they will beat supper there; and tell me if Mason is with them, and what he isdoing.”I went. I found all the party in the dining-room at supper, as Mr.Rochester had said; they were not seated at table,—the supper wasarranged on the sideboard; each had taken what he chose, and they stoodabout here and there in groups, their plates and glasses in theirhands. Every one seemed in high glee; laughter and conversation weregeneral and animated. Mr. Mason stood near the fire, talking to Coloneland Mrs. Dent, and appeared as merry as any of them. I filled awine-glass (I saw Miss Ingram watch me frowningly as I did so: shethought I was taking a liberty, I daresay), and I returned to thelibrary.Mr. Rochester’s extreme pallor had disappeared, and he looked once morefirm and stern. He took the glass from my hand.“Here is to your health, ministrant spirit!” he said. He swallowed thecontents and returned it to me. “What are they doing, Jane?”“Laughing and talking, sir.”“They don’t look grave and mysterious, as if they had heard somethingstrange?”“Not at all: they are full of jests and gaiety.”“And Mason?”“He was laughing too.”“If all these people came in a body and spat at me, what would you do,Jane?”“Turn them out of the room, sir, if I could.”He half smiled. “But if I were to go to them, and they only looked atme coldly, and whispered sneeringly amongst each other, and thendropped off and left me one by one, what then? Would you go with them?”“I rather think not, sir: I should have more pleasure in staying withyou.”“To comfort me?”“Yes, sir, to comfort you, as well as I could.”“And if they laid you under a ban for adhering to me?”“I, probably, should know nothing about their ban; and if I did, Ishould care nothing about it.”“Then, you could dare censure for my sake?”“I could dare it for the sake of any friend who deserved my adherence;as you, I am sure, do.”“Go back now into the room; step quietly up to Mason, and whisper inhis ear that Mr. Rochester is come and wishes to see him: show him inhere and then leave me.”“Yes, sir.”I did his behest. The company all stared at me as I passed straightamong them. I sought Mr. Mason, delivered the message, and preceded himfrom the room: I ushered him into the library, and then I wentupstairs.At a late hour, after I had been in bed some time, I heard the visitorsrepair to their chambers: I distinguished Mr. Rochester’s voice, andheard him say, “This way, Mason; this is your room.”He spoke cheerfully: the gay tones set my heart at ease. I was soonasleep.CHAPTER XXI had forgotten to draw my curtain, which I usually did, and also tolet down my window-blind. The consequence was, that when the moon,which was full and bright (for the night was fine), came in her courseto that space in the sky opposite my casement, and looked in at methrough the unveiled panes, her glorious gaze roused me. Awaking in thedead of night, I opened my eyes on her disk—silver-white and crystalclear. It was beautiful, but too solemn: I half rose, and stretched myarm to draw the curtain.Good God! What a cry!The night—its silence—its rest, was rent in twain by a savage, a sharp,a shrilly sound that ran from end to end of Thornfield Hall.My pulse stopped: my heart stood still; my stretched arm was paralysed.The cry died, and was not renewed. Indeed, whatever being uttered thatfearful shriek could not soon repeat it: not the widest-winged condoron the Andes could, twice in succession, send out such a yell from thecloud shrouding his eyrie. The thing delivering such utterance mustrest ere it could repeat the effort.It came out of the third storey; for it passed overhead. Andoverhead—yes, in the room just above my chamber-ceiling—I now heard astruggle: a deadly one it seemed from the noise; and a half-smotheredvoice shouted—“Help! help! help!” three times rapidly.“Will no one come?” it cried; and then, while the staggering andstamping went on wildly, I distinguished through plank and plaster:—“Rochester! Rochester! for God’s sake, come!”A chamber-door opened: some one ran, or rushed, along the gallery.Another step stamped on the flooring above and something fell; andthere was silence.I had put on some clothes, though horror shook all my limbs; I issuedfrom my apartment. The sleepers were all aroused: ejaculations,terrified murmurs sounded in every room; door after door unclosed; onelooked out and another looked out; the gallery filled. Gentlemen andladies alike had quitted their beds; and “Oh! what is it?”—“Who ishurt?”—“What has happened?”—“Fetch a light!”—“Is it fire?”—“Are thererobbers?”—“Where shall we run?” was demanded confusedly on all hands.But for the moonlight they would have been in complete darkness. Theyran to and fro; they crowded together: some sobbed, some stumbled: theconfusion was inextricable.“Where the devil is Rochester?” cried Colonel Dent. “I cannot find himin his bed.”“Here! here!” was shouted in return. “Be composed, all of you: I’mcoming.”And the door at the end of the gallery opened, and Mr. Rochesteradvanced with a candle: he had just descended from the upper storey.One of the ladies ran to him directly; she seized his arm: it was MissIngram.“What awful event has taken place?” said she. “Speak! let us know theworst at once!”“But don’t pull me down or strangle me,” he replied: for the MissesEshton were clinging about him now; and the two dowagers, in vast whitewrappers, were bearing down on him like ships in full sail.“All’s right!—all’s right!” he cried. “It’s a mere rehearsal of MuchAdo about Nothing. Ladies, keep off, or I shall wax dangerous.”And dangerous he looked: his black eyes darted sparks. Calming himselfby an effort, he added—“A servant has had the nightmare; that is all. She’s an excitable,nervous person: she construed her dream into an apparition, orsomething of that sort, no doubt; and has taken a fit with fright. Now,then, I must see you all back into your rooms; for, till the house issettled, she cannot be looked after. Gentlemen, have the goodness toset the ladies the example. Miss Ingram, I am sure you will not fail inevincing superiority to idle terrors. Amy and Louisa, return to yournests like a pair of doves, as you are. Mesdames” (to the dowagers),“you will take cold to a dead certainty, if you stay in this chillgallery any longer.”And so, by dint of alternate coaxing and commanding, he contrived toget them all once more enclosed in their separate dormitories. I didnot wait to be ordered back to mine, but retreated unnoticed, asunnoticed I had left it.Not, however, to go to bed: on the contrary, I began and dressed myselfcarefully. The sounds I had heard after the scream, and the words thathad been uttered, had probably been heard only by me; for they hadproceeded from the room above mine: but they assured me that it was nota servant’s dream which had thus struck horror through the house; andthat the explanation Mr. Rochester had given was merely an inventionframed to pacify his guests. I dressed, then, to be ready foremergencies. When dressed, I sat a long time by the window looking outover the silent grounds and silvered fields and waiting for I knew notwhat. It seemed to me that some event must follow the strange cry,struggle, and call.No: stillness returned: each murmur and movement ceased gradually, andin about an hour Thornfield Hall was again as hushed as a desert. Itseemed that sleep and night had resumed their empire. Meantime the moondeclined: she was about to set. Not liking to sit in the cold anddarkness, I thought I would lie down on my bed, dressed as I was. Ileft the window, and moved with little noise across the carpet; as Istooped to take off my shoes, a cautious hand tapped low at the door.“Am I wanted?” I asked.“Are you up?” asked the voice I expected to hear, viz., my master’s.“Yes, sir.”“And dressed?”“Yes.”“Come out, then, quietly.”I obeyed. Mr. Rochester stood in the gallery holding a light.“I want you,” he said: “come this way: take your time, and make nonoise.”My slippers were thin: I could walk the matted floor as softly as acat. He glided up the gallery and up the stairs, and stopped in thedark, low corridor of the fateful third storey: I had followed andstood at his side.“Have you a sponge in your room?” he asked in a whisper.“Yes, sir.”“Have you any salts—volatile salts?”“Yes.”“Go back and fetch both.”I returned, sought the sponge on the washstand, the salts in my drawer,and once more retraced my steps. He still waited; he held a key in hishand: approaching one of the small, black doors, he put it in the lock;he paused, and addressed me again.“You don’t turn sick at the sight of blood?”“I think I shall not: I have never been tried yet.”I felt a thrill while I answered him; but no coldness, and nofaintness.“Just give me your hand,” he said: “it will not do to risk a faintingfit.”I put my fingers into his. “Warm and steady,” was his remark: he turnedthe key and opened the door.I saw a room I remembered to have seen before, the day Mrs. Fairfaxshowed me over the house: it was hung with tapestry; but the tapestrywas now looped up in one part, and there was a door apparent, which hadthen been concealed. This door was open; a light shone out of the roomwithin: I heard thence a snarling, snatching sound, almost like a dogquarrelling. Mr. Rochester, putting down his candle, said to me, “Waita minute,” and he went forward to the inner apartment. A shout oflaughter greeted his entrance; noisy at first, and terminating in GracePoole’s own goblin ha! ha! _She_ then was there. He made some sort ofarrangement without speaking, though I heard a low voice address him:he came out and closed the door behind him.“Here, Jane!” he said; and I walked round to the other side of a largebed, which with its drawn curtains concealed a considerable portion ofthe chamber. An easy-chair was near the bed-head: a man sat in it,dressed with the exception of his coat; he was still; his head leantback; his eyes were closed. Mr. Rochester held the candle over him; Irecognised in his pale and seemingly lifeless face—the stranger, Mason:I saw too that his linen on one side, and one arm, was almost soaked inblood.“Hold the candle,” said Mr. Rochester, and I took it: he fetched abasin of water from the washstand: “Hold that,” said he. I obeyed. Hetook the sponge, dipped it in, and moistened the corpse-like face; heasked for my smelling-bottle, and applied it to the nostrils. Mr. Masonshortly unclosed his eyes; he groaned. Mr. Rochester opened the shirtof the wounded man, whose arm and shoulder were bandaged: he spongedaway blood, trickling fast down.“Is there immediate danger?” murmured Mr. Mason.“Pooh! No—a mere scratch. Don’t be so overcome, man: bear up! I’llfetch a surgeon for you now, myself: you’ll be able to be removed bymorning, I hope. Jane,” he continued.“Sir?”“I shall have to leave you in this room with this gentleman, for anhour, or perhaps two hours: you will sponge the blood as I do when itreturns: if he feels faint, you will put the glass of water on thatstand to his lips, and your salts to his nose. You will not speak tohim on any pretext—and—Richard, it will be at the peril of your life ifyou speak to her: open your lips—agitate yourself—and I’ll not answerfor the consequences.”Again the poor man groaned; he looked as if he dared not move; fear,either of death or of something else, appeared almost to paralyse him.Mr. Rochester put the now bloody sponge into my hand, and I proceededto use it as he had done. He watched me a second, then saying,“Remember!—No conversation,” he left the room. I experienced a strangefeeling as the key grated in the lock, and the sound of his retreatingstep ceased to be heard.Here then I was in the third storey, fastened into one of its mysticcells; night around me; a pale and bloody spectacle under my eyes andhands; a murderess hardly separated from me by a single door: yes—thatwas appalling—the rest I could bear; but I shuddered at the thought ofGrace Poole bursting out upon me.I must keep to my post, however. I must watch this ghastlycountenance—these blue, still lips forbidden to unclose—these eyes nowshut, now opening, now wandering through the room, now fixing on me,and ever glazed with the dulness of horror. I must dip my hand againand again in the basin of blood and water, and wipe away the tricklinggore. I must see the light of the unsnuffed candle wane on myemployment; the shadows darken on the wrought, antique tapestry roundme, and grow black under the hangings of the vast old bed, and quiverstrangely over the doors of a great cabinet opposite—whose front,divided into twelve panels, bore, in grim design, the heads of thetwelve apostles, each enclosed in its separate panel as in a frame;while above them at the top rose an ebon crucifix and a dying Christ.According as the shifting obscurity and flickering gleam hovered hereor glanced there, it was now the bearded physician, Luke, that bent hisbrow; now St. John’s long hair that waved; and anon the devilish faceof Judas, that grew out of the panel, and seemed gathering life andthreatening a revelation of the arch-traitor—of Satan himself—in hissubordinate’s form.Amidst all this, I had to listen as well as watch: to listen for themovements of the wild beast or the fiend in yonder side den. But sinceMr. Rochester’s visit it seemed spellbound: all the night I heard butthree sounds at three long intervals,—a step creak, a momentary renewalof the snarling, canine noise, and a deep human groan.Then my own thoughts worried me. What crime was this, that livedincarnate in this sequestered mansion, and could neither be expellednor subdued by the owner?—what mystery, that broke out now in fire andnow in blood, at the deadest hours of night? What creature was it,that, masked in an ordinary woman’s face and shape, uttered the voice,now of a mocking demon, and anon of a carrion-seeking bird of prey?And this man I bent over—this commonplace, quiet stranger—how had hebecome involved in the web of horror? and why had the Fury flown athim? What made him seek this quarter of the house at an untimelyseason, when he should have been asleep in bed? I had heard Mr.Rochester assign him an apartment below—what brought him here! And why,now, was he so tame under the violence or treachery done him? Why didhe so quietly submit to the concealment Mr. Rochester enforced? Why_did_ Mr. Rochester enforce this concealment? His guest had beenoutraged, his own life on a former occasion had been hideously plottedagainst; and both attempts he smothered in secrecy and sank inoblivion! Lastly, I saw Mr. Mason was submissive to Mr. Rochester; thatthe impetuous will of the latter held complete sway over the inertnessof the former: the few words which had passed between them assured meof this. It was evident that in their former intercourse, the passivedisposition of the one had been habitually influenced by the activeenergy of the other: whence then had arisen Mr. Rochester’s dismay whenhe heard of Mr. Mason’s arrival? Why had the mere name of thisunresisting individual—whom his word now sufficed to control like achild—fallen on him, a few hours since, as a thunderbolt might fall onan oak?Oh! I could not forget his look and his paleness when he whispered:“Jane, I have got a blow—I have got a blow, Jane.” I could not forgethow the arm had trembled which he rested on my shoulder: and it was nolight matter which could thus bow the resolute spirit and thrill thevigorous frame of Fairfax Rochester.“When will he come? When will he come?” I cried inwardly, as the nightlingered and lingered—as my bleeding patient drooped, moaned, sickened:and neither day nor aid arrived. I had, again and again, held the waterto Mason’s white lips; again and again offered him the stimulatingsalts: my efforts seemed ineffectual: either bodily or mentalsuffering, or loss of blood, or all three combined, were fastprostrating his strength. He moaned so, and looked so weak, wild, andlost, I feared he was dying; and I might not even speak to him.The candle, wasted at last, went out; as it expired, I perceivedstreaks of grey light edging the window curtains: dawn was thenapproaching. Presently I heard Pilot bark far below, out of his distantkennel in the courtyard: hope revived. Nor was it unwarranted: in fiveminutes more the grating key, the yielding lock, warned me my watch wasrelieved. It could not have lasted more than two hours: many a week hasseemed shorter.Mr. Rochester entered, and with him the surgeon he had been to fetch.“Now, Carter, be on the alert,” he said to this last: “I give you buthalf-an-hour for dressing the wound, fastening the bandages, gettingthe patient downstairs and all.”“But is he fit to move, sir?”“No doubt of it; it is nothing serious; he is nervous, his spirits mustbe kept up. Come, set to work.”Mr. Rochester drew back the thick curtain, drew up the holland blind,let in all the daylight he could; and I was surprised and cheered tosee how far dawn was advanced: what rosy streaks were beginning tobrighten the east. Then he approached Mason, whom the surgeon wasalready handling.“Now, my good fellow, how are you?” he asked.“She’s done for me, I fear,” was the faint reply.“Not a whit!—courage! This day fortnight you’ll hardly be a pin theworse of it: you’ve lost a little blood; that’s all. Carter, assure himthere’s no danger.”“I can do that conscientiously,” said Carter, who had now undone thebandages; “only I wish I could have got here sooner: he would not havebled so much—but how is this? The flesh on the shoulder is torn as wellas cut. This wound was not done with a knife: there have been teethhere!”“She bit me,” he murmured. “She worried me like a tigress, whenRochester got the knife from her.”“You should not have yielded: you should have grappled with her atonce,” said Mr. Rochester.“But under such circumstances, what could one do?” returned Mason. “Oh,it was frightful!” he added, shuddering. “And I did not expect it: shelooked so quiet at first.”“I warned you,” was his friend’s answer; “I said—be on your guard whenyou go near her. Besides, you might have waited till to-morrow, and hadme with you: it was mere folly to attempt the interview to-night, andalone.”“I thought I could have done some good.”“You thought! you thought! Yes, it makes me impatient to hear you: but,however, you have suffered, and are likely to suffer enough for nottaking my advice; so I’ll say no more. Carter—hurry!—hurry! The sunwill soon rise, and I must have him off.”“Directly, sir; the shoulder is just bandaged. I must look to thisother wound in the arm: she has had her teeth here too, I think.”“She sucked the blood: she said she’d drain my heart,” said Mason.I saw Mr. Rochester shudder: a singularly marked expression of disgust,horror, hatred, warped his countenance almost to distortion; but heonly said—“Come, be silent, Richard, and never mind her gibberish: don’t repeatit.”“I wish I could forget it,” was the answer.“You will when you are out of the country: when you get back to SpanishTown, you may think of her as dead and buried—or rather, you need notthink of her at all.”“Impossible to forget this night!”“It is not impossible: have some energy, man. You thought you were asdead as a herring two hours since, and you are all alive and talkingnow. There!—Carter has done with you or nearly so; I’ll make you decentin a trice. Jane” (he turned to me for the first time since hisre-entrance), “take this key: go down into my bedroom, and walkstraight forward into my dressing-room: open the top drawer of thewardrobe and take out a clean shirt and neck-handkerchief: bring themhere; and be nimble.”I went; sought the repository he had mentioned, found the articlesnamed, and returned with them.“Now,” said he, “go to the other side of the bed while I order histoilet; but don’t leave the room: you may be wanted again.”I retired as directed.“Was anybody stirring below when you went down, Jane?” inquired Mr.Rochester presently.“No, sir; all was very still.”“We shall get you off cannily, Dick: and it will be better, both foryour sake, and for that of the poor creature in yonder. I have strivenlong to avoid exposure, and I should not like it to come at last. Here,Carter, help him on with his waist-coat. Where did you leave yourfurred cloak? You can’t travel a mile without that, I know, in thisdamned cold climate. In your room?—Jane, run down to Mr. Mason’sroom,—the one next mine,—and fetch a cloak you will see there.”Again I ran, and again returned, bearing an immense mantle lined andedged with fur.“Now, I’ve another errand for you,” said my untiring master; “you mustaway to my room again. What a mercy you are shod with velvet, Jane!—aclod-hopping messenger would never do at this juncture. You must openthe middle drawer of my toilet-table and take out a little phial and alittle glass you will find there,—quick!”I flew thither and back, bringing the desired vessels.“That’s well! Now, doctor, I shall take the liberty of administering adose myself, on my own responsibility. I got this cordial at Rome, ofan Italian charlatan—a fellow you would have kicked, Carter. It is nota thing to be used indiscriminately, but it is good upon occasion: asnow, for instance. Jane, a little water.”He held out the tiny glass, and I half filled it from the water-bottleon the washstand.“That will do;—now wet the lip of the phial.”I did so; he measured twelve drops of a crimson liquid, and presentedit to Mason.“Drink, Richard: it will give you the heart you lack, for an hour orso.”“But will it hurt me?—is it inflammatory?”“Drink! drink! drink!”Mr. Mason obeyed, because it was evidently useless to resist. He wasdressed now: he still looked pale, but he was no longer gory andsullied. Mr. Rochester let him sit three minutes after he had swallowedthe liquid; he then took his arm—“Now I am sure you can get on your feet,” he said—“try.”The patient rose.“Carter, take him under the other shoulder. Be of good cheer, Richard;step out—that’s it!”“I do feel better,” remarked Mr. Mason.“I am sure you do. Now, Jane, trip on before us away to the backstairs;unbolt the side-passage door, and tell the driver of the post-chaiseyou will see in the yard—or just outside, for I told him not to drivehis rattling wheels over the pavement—to be ready; we are coming: and,Jane, if any one is about, come to the foot of the stairs and hem.”It was by this time half-past five, and the sun was on the point ofrising; but I found the kitchen still dark and silent. The side-passagedoor was fastened; I opened it with as little noise as possible: allthe yard was quiet; but the gates stood wide open, and there was apost-chaise, with horses ready harnessed, and driver seated on the box,stationed outside. I approached him, and said the gentlemen werecoming; he nodded: then I looked carefully round and listened. Thestillness of early morning slumbered everywhere; the curtains were yetdrawn over the servants’ chamber windows; little birds were justtwittering in the blossom-blanched orchard trees, whose boughs droopedlike white garlands over the wall enclosing one side of the yard; thecarriage horses stamped from time to time in their closed stables: allelse was still.The gentlemen now appeared. Mason, supported by Mr. Rochester and thesurgeon, seemed to walk with tolerable ease: they assisted him into thechaise; Carter followed.“Take care of him,” said Mr. Rochester to the latter, “and keep him atyour house till he is quite well: I shall ride over in a day or two tosee how he gets on. Richard, how is it with you?”“The fresh air revives me, Fairfax.”“Leave the window open on his side, Carter; there is no wind—good-bye,Dick.”“Fairfax—”“Well what is it?”“Let her be taken care of; let her be treated as tenderly as may be:let her—” he stopped and burst into tears.“I do my best; and have done it, and will do it,” was the answer: heshut up the chaise door, and the vehicle drove away.“Yet would to God there was an end of all this!” added Mr. Rochester,as he closed and barred the heavy yard-gates.This done, he moved with slow step and abstracted air towards a door inthe wall bordering the orchard. I, supposing he had done with me,prepared to return to the house; again, however, I heard him call“Jane!” He had opened the portal and stood at it, waiting for me.“Come where there is some freshness, for a few moments,” he said; “thathouse is a mere dungeon: don’t you feel it so?”“It seems to me a splendid mansion, sir.”“The glamour of inexperience is over your eyes,” he answered; “and yousee it through a charmed medium: you cannot discern that the gilding isslime and the silk draperies cobwebs; that the marble is sordid slate,and the polished woods mere refuse chips and scaly bark. Now _here_”(he pointed to the leafy enclosure we had entered) “all is real, sweet,and pure.”He strayed down a walk edged with box, with apple trees, pear trees,and cherry trees on one side, and a border on the other full of allsorts of old-fashioned flowers, stocks, sweet-williams, primroses,pansies, mingled with southernwood, sweet-briar, and various fragrantherbs. They were fresh now as a succession of April showers and gleams,followed by a lovely spring morning, could make them: the sun was justentering the dappled east, and his light illumined the wreathed anddewy orchard trees and shone down the quiet walks under them.“Jane, will you have a flower?”He gathered a half-blown rose, the first on the bush, and offered it tome.“Thank you, sir.”“Do you like this sunrise, Jane? That sky with its high and lightclouds which are sure to melt away as the day waxes warm—this placidand balmly atmosphere?”“I do, very much.”“You have passed a strange night, Jane.”“Yes, sir.”“And it has made you look pale—were you afraid when I left you alonewith Mason?”“I was afraid of some one coming out of the inner room.”“But I had fastened the door—I had the key in my pocket: I should havebeen a careless shepherd if I had left a lamb—my pet lamb—so near awolf’s den, unguarded: you were safe.”“Will Grace Poole live here still, sir?”“Oh yes! don’t trouble your head about her—put the thing out of yourthoughts.”“Yet it seems to me your life is hardly secure while she stays.”“Never fear—I will take care of myself.”“Is the danger you apprehended last night gone by now, sir?”“I cannot vouch for that till Mason is out of England: nor even then.To live, for me, Jane, is to stand on a crater-crust which may crackand spue fire any day.”“But Mr. Mason seems a man easily led. Your influence, sir, isevidently potent with him: he will never set you at defiance orwilfully injure you.”“Oh, no! Mason will not defy me; nor, knowing it, will he hurt me—but,unintentionally, he might in a moment, by one careless word, depriveme, if not of life, yet for ever of happiness.”“Tell him to be cautious, sir: let him know what you fear, and show himhow to avert the danger.”He laughed sardonically, hastily took my hand, and as hastily threw itfrom him.“If I could do that, simpleton, where would the danger be? Annihilatedin a moment. Ever since I have known Mason, I have only had to say tohim ‘Do that,’ and the thing has been done. But I cannot give himorders in this case: I cannot say ‘Beware of harming me, Richard;’ forit is imperative that I should keep him ignorant that harm to me ispossible. Now you look puzzled; and I will puzzle you further. You aremy little friend, are you not?”“I like to serve you, sir, and to obey you in all that is right.”“Precisely: I see you do. I see genuine contentment in your gait andmien, your eye and face, when you are helping me and pleasingme—working for me, and with me, in, as you characteristically say,‘_all that is right_:’ for if I bid you do what you thought wrong,there would be no light-footed running, no neat-handed alacrity, nolively glance and animated complexion. My friend would then turn to me,quiet and pale, and would say, ‘No, sir; that is impossible: I cannotdo it, because it is wrong;’ and would become immutable as a fixedstar. Well, you too have power over me, and may injure me: yet I darenot show you where I am vulnerable, lest, faithful and friendly as youare, you should transfix me at once.”“If you have no more to fear from Mr. Mason than you have from me, sir,you are very safe.”“God grant it may be so! Here, Jane, is an arbour; sit down.”The arbour was an arch in the wall, lined with ivy; it contained arustic seat. Mr. Rochester took it, leaving room, however, for me: butI stood before him.“Sit,” he said; “the bench is long enough for two. You don’t hesitateto take a place at my side, do you? Is that wrong, Jane?”I answered him by assuming it: to refuse would, I felt, have beenunwise.“Now, my little friend, while the sun drinks the dew—while all theflowers in this old garden awake and expand, and the birds fetch theiryoung ones’ breakfast out of the Thornfield, and the early bees dotheir first spell of work—I’ll put a case to you, which you mustendeavour to suppose your own: but first, look at me, and tell me youare at ease, and not fearing that I err in detaining you, or that youerr in staying.”“No, sir; I am content.”“Well then, Jane, call to aid your fancy:—suppose you were no longer agirl well reared and disciplined, but a wild boy indulged fromchildhood upwards; imagine yourself in a remote foreign land; conceivethat you there commit a capital error, no matter of what nature or fromwhat motives, but one whose consequences must follow you through lifeand taint all your existence. Mind, I don’t say a _crime_; I am notspeaking of shedding of blood or any other guilty act, which might makethe perpetrator amenable to the law: my word is _error_. The results ofwhat you have done become in time to you utterly insupportable; youtake measures to obtain relief: unusual measures, but neither unlawfulnor culpable. Still you are miserable; for hope has quitted you on thevery confines of life: your sun at noon darkens in an eclipse, whichyou feel will not leave it till the time of setting. Bitter and baseassociations have become the sole food of your memory: you wander hereand there, seeking rest in exile: happiness in pleasure—I mean inheartless, sensual pleasure—such as dulls intellect and blightsfeeling. Heart-weary and soul-withered, you come home after years ofvoluntary banishment: you make a new acquaintance—how or where nomatter: you find in this stranger much of the good and bright qualitieswhich you have sought for twenty years, and never before encountered;and they are all fresh, healthy, without soil and without taint. Suchsociety revives, regenerates: you feel better days come back—higherwishes, purer feelings; you desire to recommence your life, and tospend what remains to you of days in a way more worthy of an immortalbeing. To attain this end, are you justified in overleaping an obstacleof custom—a mere conventional impediment which neither your consciencesanctifies nor your judgment approves?”He paused for an answer: and what was I to say? Oh, for some goodspirit to suggest a judicious and satisfactory response! Vainaspiration! The west wind whispered in the ivy round me; but no gentleAriel borrowed its breath as a medium of speech: the birds sang in thetree-tops; but their song, however sweet, was inarticulate.Again Mr. Rochester propounded his query:“Is the wandering and sinful, but now rest-seeking and repentant, manjustified in daring the world’s opinion, in order to attach to him forever this gentle, gracious, genial stranger, thereby securing his ownpeace of mind and regeneration of life?”“Sir,” I answered, “a wanderer’s repose or a sinner’s reformationshould never depend on a fellow-creature. Men and women die;philosophers falter in wisdom, and Christians in goodness: if any oneyou know has suffered and erred, let him look higher than his equalsfor strength to amend and solace to heal.”“But the instrument—the instrument! God, who does the work, ordains theinstrument. I have myself—I tell it you without parable—been a worldly,dissipated, restless man; and I believe I have found the instrument formy cure in—”He paused: the birds went on carolling, the leaves lightly rustling. Ialmost wondered they did not check their songs and whispers to catchthe suspended revelation; but they would have had to wait manyminutes—so long was the silence protracted. At last I looked up at thetardy speaker: he was looking eagerly at me.“Little friend,” said he, in quite a changed tone—while his facechanged too, losing all its softness and gravity, and becoming harshand sarcastic—“you have noticed my tender penchant for Miss Ingram:don’t you think if I married her she would regenerate me with avengeance?”He got up instantly, went quite to the other end of the walk, and whenhe came back he was humming a tune.“Jane, Jane,” said he, stopping before me, “you are quite pale withyour vigils: don’t you curse me for disturbing your rest?”“Curse you? No, sir.”“Shake hands in confirmation of the word. What cold fingers! They werewarmer last night when I touched them at the door of the mysteriouschamber. Jane, when will you watch with me again?”“Whenever I can be useful, sir.”“For instance, the night before I am married! I am sure I shall not beable to sleep. Will you promise to sit up with me to bear me company?To you I can talk of my lovely one: for now you have seen her and knowher.”“Yes, sir.”“She’s a rare one, is she not, Jane?”“Yes, sir.”“A strapper—a real strapper, Jane: big, brown, and buxom; with hairjust such as the ladies of Carthage must have had. Bless me! there’sDent and Lynn in the stables! Go in by the shrubbery, through thatwicket.”As I went one way, he went another, and I heard him in the yard, sayingcheerfully—“Mason got the start of you all this morning; he was gone beforesunrise: I rose at four to see him off.”CHAPTER XXIPresentiments are strange things! and so are sympathies; and so aresigns; and the three combined make one mystery to which humanity hasnot yet found the key. I never laughed at presentiments in my life,because I have had strange ones of my own. Sympathies, I believe, exist(for instance, between far-distant, long-absent, wholly estrangedrelatives asserting, notwithstanding their alienation, the unity of thesource to which each traces his origin) whose workings baffle mortalcomprehension. And signs, for aught we know, may be but the sympathiesof Nature with man.When I was a little girl, only six years old, I one night heard BessieLeaven say to Martha Abbot that she had been dreaming about a littlechild; and that to dream of children was a sure sign of trouble, eitherto one’s self or one’s kin. The saying might have worn out of mymemory, had not a circumstance immediately followed which servedindelibly to fix it there. The next day Bessie was sent for home to thedeathbed of her little sister.Of late I had often recalled this saying and this incident; for duringthe past week scarcely a night had gone over my couch that had notbrought with it a dream of an infant, which I sometimes hushed in myarms, sometimes dandled on my knee, sometimes watched playing withdaisies on a lawn, or again, dabbling its hands in running water. Itwas a wailing child this night, and a laughing one the next: now itnestled close to me, and now it ran from me; but whatever mood theapparition evinced, whatever aspect it wore, it failed not for sevensuccessive nights to meet me the moment I entered the land of slumber.I did not like this iteration of one idea—this strange recurrence ofone image, and I grew nervous as bedtime approached and the hour of thevision drew near. It was from companionship with this baby-phantom Ihad been roused on that moonlight night when I heard the cry; and itwas on the afternoon of the day following I was summoned downstairs bya message that some one wanted me in Mrs. Fairfax’s room. On repairingthither, I found a man waiting for me, having the appearance of agentleman’s servant: he was dressed in deep mourning, and the hat heheld in his hand was surrounded with a crape band.“I daresay you hardly remember me, Miss,” he said, rising as I entered;“but my name is Leaven: I lived coachman with Mrs. Reed when you wereat Gateshead, eight or nine years since, and I live there still.”“Oh, Robert! how do you do? I remember you very well: you used to giveme a ride sometimes on Miss Georgiana’s bay pony. And how is Bessie?You are married to Bessie?”“Yes, Miss: my wife is very hearty, thank you; she brought me anotherlittle one about two months since—we have three now—and both mother andchild are thriving.”“And are the family well at the house, Robert?”“I am sorry I can’t give you better news of them, Miss: they are verybadly at present—in great trouble.”“I hope no one is dead,” I said, glancing at his black dress. He toolooked down at the crape round his hat and replied—“Mr. John died yesterday was a week, at his chambers in London.”“Mr. John?”“Yes.”“And how does his mother bear it?”“Why, you see, Miss Eyre, it is not a common mishap: his life has beenvery wild: these last three years he gave himself up to strange ways,and his death was shocking.”“I heard from Bessie he was not doing well.”“Doing well! He could not do worse: he ruined his health and his estateamongst the worst men and the worst women. He got into debt and intojail: his mother helped him out twice, but as soon as he was free hereturned to his old companions and habits. His head was not strong: theknaves he lived amongst fooled him beyond anything I ever heard. Hecame down to Gateshead about three weeks ago and wanted missis to giveup all to him. Missis refused: her means have long been much reduced byhis extravagance; so he went back again, and the next news was that hewas dead. How he died, God knows!—they say he killed himself.”I was silent: the tidings were frightful. Robert Leaven resumed—“Missis had been out of health herself for some time: she had got verystout, but was not strong with it; and the loss of money and fear ofpoverty were quite breaking her down. The information about Mr. John’sdeath and the manner of it came too suddenly: it brought on a stroke.She was three days without speaking; but last Tuesday she seemed ratherbetter: she appeared as if she wanted to say something, and kept makingsigns to my wife and mumbling. It was only yesterday morning, however,that Bessie understood she was pronouncing your name; and at last shemade out the words, ‘Bring Jane—fetch Jane Eyre: I want to speak toher.’ Bessie is not sure whether she is in her right mind, or meansanything by the words; but she told Miss Reed and Miss Georgiana, andadvised them to send for you. The young ladies put it off at first; buttheir mother grew so restless, and said, ‘Jane, Jane,’ so many times,that at last they consented. I left Gateshead yesterday: and if you canget ready, Miss, I should like to take you back with me early to-morrowmorning.”“Yes, Robert, I shall be ready: it seems to me that I ought to go.”“I think so too, Miss. Bessie said she was sure you would not refuse:but I suppose you will have to ask leave before you can get off?”“Yes; and I will do it now;” and having directed him to the servants’hall, and recommended him to the care of John’s wife, and theattentions of John himself, I went in search of Mr. Rochester.He was not in any of the lower rooms; he was not in the yard, thestables, or the grounds. I asked Mrs. Fairfax if she had seen him;—yes:she believed he was playing billiards with Miss Ingram. To thebilliard-room I hastened: the click of balls and the hum of voicesresounded thence; Mr. Rochester, Miss Ingram, the two Misses Eshton,and their admirers, were all busied in the game. It required somecourage to disturb so interesting a party; my errand, however, was oneI could not defer, so I approached the master where he stood at MissIngram’s side. She turned as I drew near, and looked at me haughtily:her eyes seemed to demand, “What can the creeping creature want now?”and when I said, in a low voice, “Mr. Rochester,” she made a movementas if tempted to order me away. I remember her appearance at themoment—it was very graceful and very striking: she wore a morning robeof sky-blue crape; a gauzy azure scarf was twisted in her hair. She hadbeen all animation with the game, and irritated pride did not lower theexpression of her haughty lineaments.“Does that person want you?” she inquired of Mr. Rochester; and Mr.Rochester turned to see who the “person” was. He made a curiousgrimace—one of his strange and equivocal demonstrations—threw down hiscue and followed me from the room.“Well, Jane?” he said, as he rested his back against the schoolroomdoor, which he had shut.“If you please, sir, I want leave of absence for a week or two.”“What to do?—where to go?”“To see a sick lady who has sent for me.”“What sick lady?—where does she live?”“At Gateshead; in ——shire.”“-shire? That is a hundred miles off! Who may she be that sends forpeople to see her that distance?”“Her name is Reed, sir—Mrs. Reed.”“Reed of Gateshead? There was a Reed of Gateshead, a magistrate.”“It is his widow, sir.”“And what have you to do with her? How do you know her?”“Mr. Reed was my uncle—my mother’s brother.”“The deuce he was! You never told me that before: you always said youhad no relations.”“None that would own me, sir. Mr. Reed is dead, and his wife cast meoff.”“Why?”“Because I was poor, and burdensome, and she disliked me.”“But Reed left children?—you must have cousins? Sir George Lynn wastalking of a Reed of Gateshead yesterday, who, he said, was one of theveriest rascals on town; and Ingram was mentioning a Georgiana Reed ofthe same place, who was much admired for her beauty a season or two agoin London.”“John Reed is dead, too, sir: he ruined himself and half-ruined hisfamily, and is supposed to have committed suicide. The news so shockedhis mother that it brought on an apoplectic attack.”“And what good can you do her? Nonsense, Jane! I would never think ofrunning a hundred miles to see an old lady who will, perhaps, be deadbefore you reach her: besides, you say she cast you off.”“Yes, sir, but that is long ago; and when her circumstances were verydifferent: I could not be easy to neglect her wishes now.”“How long will you stay?”“As short a time as possible, sir.”“Promise me only to stay a week—”“I had better not pass my word: I might be obliged to break it.”“At all events you _will_ come back: you will not be induced under anypretext to take up a permanent residence with her?”“Oh, no! I shall certainly return if all be well.”“And who goes with you? You don’t travel a hundred miles alone.”“No, sir, she has sent her coachman.”“A person to be trusted?”“Yes, sir, he has lived ten years in the family.”Mr. Rochester meditated. “When do you wish to go?”“Early to-morrow morning, sir.”“Well, you must have some money; you can’t travel without money, and Idaresay you have not much: I have given you no salary yet. How muchhave you in the world, Jane?” he asked, smiling.I drew out my purse; a meagre thing it was. “Five shillings, sir.” Hetook the purse, poured the hoard into his palm, and chuckled over it asif its scantiness amused him. Soon he produced his pocket-book: “Here,”said he, offering me a note; it was fifty pounds, and he owed me butfifteen. I told him I had no change.“I don’t want change; you know that. Take your wages.”I declined accepting more than was my due. He scowled at first; then,as if recollecting something, he said—“Right, right! Better not give you all now: you would, perhaps, stayaway three months if you had fifty pounds. There are ten; is it notplenty?”“Yes, sir, but now you owe me five.”“Come back for it, then; I am your banker for forty pounds.”“Mr. Rochester, I may as well mention another matter of business to youwhile I have the opportunity.”“Matter of business? I am curious to hear it.”“You have as good as informed me, sir, that you are going shortly to bemarried?”“Yes; what then?”“In that case, sir, Adèle ought to go to school: I am sure you willperceive the necessity of it.”“To get her out of my bride’s way, who might otherwise walk over herrather too emphatically? There’s sense in the suggestion; not a doubtof it. Adèle, as you say, must go to school; and you, of course, mustmarch straight to—the devil?”“I hope not, sir; but I must seek another situation somewhere.”“In course!” he exclaimed, with a twang of voice and a distortion offeatures equally fantastic and ludicrous. He looked at me some minutes.“And old Madam Reed, or the Misses, her daughters, will be solicited byyou to seek a place, I suppose?”“No, sir; I am not on such terms with my relatives as would justify mein asking favours of them—but I shall advertise.”“You shall walk up the pyramids of Egypt!” he growled. “At your perilyou advertise! I wish I had only offered you a sovereign instead of tenpounds. Give me back nine pounds, Jane; I’ve a use for it.”“And so have I, sir,” I returned, putting my hands and my purse behindme. “I could not spare the money on any account.”“Little niggard!” said he, “refusing me a pecuniary request! Give mefive pounds, Jane.”“Not five shillings, sir; nor five pence.”“Just let me look at the cash.”“No, sir; you are not to be trusted.”“Jane!”“Sir?”“Promise me one thing.”“I’ll promise you anything, sir, that I think I am likely to perform.”“Not to advertise: and to trust this quest of a situation to me. I’llfind you one in time.”“I shall be glad so to do, sir, if you, in your turn, will promise thatI and Adèle shall be both safe out of the house before your brideenters it.”“Very well! very well! I’ll pledge my word on it. You go to-morrow,then?”“Yes, sir; early.”“Shall you come down to the drawing-room after dinner?”“No, sir, I must prepare for the journey.”“Then you and I must bid good-bye for a little while?”“I suppose so, sir.”“And how do people perform that ceremony of parting, Jane? Teach me;I’m not quite up to it.”“They say, Farewell, or any other form they prefer.”“Then say it.”“Farewell, Mr. Rochester, for the present.”“What must I say?”“The same, if you like, sir.”“Farewell, Miss Eyre, for the present; is that all?”“Yes.”“It seems stingy, to my notions, and dry, and unfriendly. I should likesomething else: a little addition to the rite. If one shook hands, forinstance; but no—that would not content me either. So you’ll do no morethan say Farewell, Jane?”“It is enough, sir: as much good-will may be conveyed in one heartyword as in many.”“Very likely; but it is blank and cool—‘Farewell.’”“How long is he going to stand with his back against that door?” Iasked myself; “I want to commence my packing.” The dinner-bell rang,and suddenly away he bolted, without another syllable: I saw him nomore during the day, and was off before he had risen in the morning.I reached the lodge at Gateshead about five o’clock in the afternoon ofthe first of May: I stepped in there before going up to the hall. Itwas very clean and neat: the ornamental windows were hung with littlewhite curtains; the floor was spotless; the grate and fire-irons wereburnished bright, and the fire burnt clear. Bessie sat on the hearth,nursing her last-born, and Robert and his sister played quietly in acorner.“Bless you!—I knew you would come!” exclaimed Mrs. Leaven, as Ientered.“Yes, Bessie,” said I, after I had kissed her; “and I trust I am nottoo late. How is Mrs. Reed?—Alive still, I hope.”“Yes, she is alive; and more sensible and collected than she was. Thedoctor says she may linger a week or two yet; but he hardly thinks shewill finally recover.”“Has she mentioned me lately?”“She was talking of you only this morning, and wishing you would come,but she is sleeping now, or was ten minutes ago, when I was up at thehouse. She generally lies in a kind of lethargy all the afternoon, andwakes up about six or seven. Will you rest yourself here an hour, Miss,and then I will go up with you?”Robert here entered, and Bessie laid her sleeping child in the cradleand went to welcome him: afterwards she insisted on my taking off mybonnet and having some tea; for she said I looked pale and tired. I wasglad to accept her hospitality; and I submitted to be relieved of mytravelling garb just as passively as I used to let her undress me whena child.Old times crowded fast back on me as I watched her bustlingabout—setting out the tea-tray with her best china, cutting bread andbutter, toasting a tea-cake, and, between whiles, giving little Robertor Jane an occasional tap or push, just as she used to give me informer days. Bessie had retained her quick temper as well as her lightfoot and good looks.Tea ready, I was going to approach the table; but she desired me to sitstill, quite in her old peremptory tones. I must be served at thefireside, she said; and she placed before me a little round stand withmy cup and a plate of toast, absolutely as she used to accommodate mewith some privately purloined dainty on a nursery chair: and I smiledand obeyed her as in bygone days.She wanted to know if I was happy at Thornfield Hall, and what sort ofa person the mistress was; and when I told her there was only a master,whether he was a nice gentleman, and if I liked him. I told her he wasrather an ugly man, but quite a gentleman; and that he treated mekindly, and I was content. Then I went on to describe to her the gaycompany that had lately been staying at the house; and to these detailsBessie listened with interest: they were precisely of the kind sherelished.In such conversation an hour was soon gone: Bessie restored to me mybonnet, &c., and, accompanied by her, I quitted the lodge for the hall.It was also accompanied by her that I had, nearly nine years ago,walked down the path I was now ascending. On a dark, misty, raw morningin January, I had left a hostile roof with a desperate and embitteredheart—a sense of outlawry and almost of reprobation—to seek the chillyharbourage of Lowood: that bourne so far away and unexplored. The samehostile roof now again rose before me: my prospects were doubtful yet;and I had yet an aching heart. I still felt as a wanderer on the faceof the earth; but I experienced firmer trust in myself and my ownpowers, and less withering dread of oppression. The gaping wound of mywrongs, too, was now quite healed; and the flame of resentmentextinguished.“You shall go into the breakfast-room first,” said Bessie, as shepreceded me through the hall; “the young ladies will be there.”In another moment I was within that apartment. There was every articleof furniture looking just as it did on the morning I was firstintroduced to Mr. Brocklehurst: the very rug he had stood upon stillcovered the hearth. Glancing at the bookcases, I thought I coulddistinguish the two volumes of Bewick’s British Birds occupying theirold place on the third shelf, and Gulliver’s Travels and the ArabianNights ranged just above. The inanimate objects were not changed; butthe living things had altered past recognition.Two young ladies appeared before me; one very tall, almost as tall asMiss Ingram—very thin too, with a sallow face and severe mien. Therewas something ascetic in her look, which was augmented by the extremeplainness of a straight-skirted, black, stuff dress, a starched linencollar, hair combed away from the temples, and the nun-like ornament ofa string of ebony beads and a crucifix. This I felt sure was Eliza,though I could trace little resemblance to her former self in thatelongated and colourless visage.The other was as certainly Georgiana: but not the Georgiana Iremembered—the slim and fairy-like girl of eleven. This was afull-blown, very plump damsel, fair as waxwork, with handsome andregular features, languishing blue eyes, and ringleted yellow hair. Thehue of her dress was black too; but its fashion was so different fromher sister’s—so much more flowing and becoming—it looked as stylish asthe other’s looked puritanical.In each of the sisters there was one trait of the mother—and only one;the thin and pallid elder daughter had her parent’s Cairngorm eye: theblooming and luxuriant younger girl had her contour of jaw andchin—perhaps a little softened, but still imparting an indescribablehardness to the countenance otherwise so voluptuous and buxom.Both ladies, as I advanced, rose to welcome me, and both addressed meby the name of “Miss Eyre.” Eliza’s greeting was delivered in a short,abrupt voice, without a smile; and then she sat down again, fixed hereyes on the fire, and seemed to forget me. Georgiana added to her “Howd’ye do?” several commonplaces about my journey, the weather, and soon, uttered in rather a drawling tone: and accompanied by sundryside-glances that measured me from head to foot—now traversing thefolds of my drab merino pelisse, and now lingering on the plaintrimming of my cottage bonnet. Young ladies have a remarkable way ofletting you know that they think you a “quiz” without actually sayingthe words. A certain superciliousness of look, coolness of manner,nonchalance of tone, express fully their sentiments on the point,without committing them by any positive rudeness in word or deed.A sneer, however, whether covert or open, had now no longer that powerover me it once possessed: as I sat between my cousins, I was surprisedto find how easy I felt under the total neglect of the one and thesemi-sarcastic attentions of the other—Eliza did not mortify, norGeorgiana ruffle me. The fact was, I had other things to think about;within the last few months feelings had been stirred in me so much morepotent than any they could raise—pains and pleasures so much more acuteand exquisite had been excited than any it was in their power toinflict or bestow—that their airs gave me no concern either for good orbad.“How is Mrs. Reed?” I asked soon, looking calmly at Georgiana, whothought fit to bridle at the direct address, as if it were anunexpected liberty.“Mrs. Reed? Ah! mama, you mean; she is extremely poorly: I doubt if youcan see her to-night.”“If,” said I, “you would just step upstairs and tell her I am come, Ishould be much obliged to you.”Georgiana almost started, and she opened her blue eyes wild and wide.“I know she had a particular wish to see me,” I added, “and I would notdefer attending to her desire longer than is absolutely necessary.”“Mama dislikes being disturbed in an evening,” remarked Eliza. I soonrose, quietly took off my bonnet and gloves, uninvited, and said Iwould just step out to Bessie—who was, I dared say, in the kitchen—andask her to ascertain whether Mrs. Reed was disposed to receive me ornot to-night. I went, and having found Bessie and despatched her on myerrand, I proceeded to take further measures. It had heretofore been myhabit always to shrink from arrogance: received as I had been to-day, Ishould, a year ago, have resolved to quit Gateshead the very nextmorning; now, it was disclosed to me all at once that that would be afoolish plan. I had taken a journey of a hundred miles to see my aunt,and I must stay with her till she was better—or dead: as to herdaughters’ pride or folly, I must put it on one side, make myselfindependent of it. So I addressed the housekeeper; asked her to show mea room, told her I should probably be a visitor here for a week or two,had my trunk conveyed to my chamber, and followed it thither myself: Imet Bessie on the landing.“Missis is awake,” said she; “I have told her you are here: come andlet us see if she will know you.”I did not need to be guided to the well-known room, to which I had sooften been summoned for chastisement or reprimand in former days. Ihastened before Bessie; I softly opened the door: a shaded light stoodon the table, for it was now getting dark. There was the greatfour-post bed with amber hangings as of old; there the toilet-table,the armchair, and the footstool, at which I had a hundred times beensentenced to kneel, to ask pardon for offences by me uncommitted. Ilooked into a certain corner near, half-expecting to see the slimoutline of a once dreaded switch which used to lurk there, waiting toleap out imp-like and lace my quivering palm or shrinking neck. Iapproached the bed; I opened the curtains and leant over the high-piledpillows.Well did I remember Mrs. Reed’s face, and I eagerly sought the familiarimage. It is a happy thing that time quells the longings of vengeanceand hushes the promptings of rage and aversion. I had left this womanin bitterness and hate, and I came back to her now with no otheremotion than a sort of ruth for her great sufferings, and a strongyearning to forget and forgive all injuries—to be reconciled and clasphands in amity.The well-known face was there: stern, relentless as ever—there was thatpeculiar eye which nothing could melt, and the somewhat raised,imperious, despotic eyebrow. How often had it lowered on me menace andhate! and how the recollection of childhood’s terrors and sorrowsrevived as I traced its harsh line now! And yet I stooped down andkissed her: she looked at me.“Is this Jane Eyre?” she said.“Yes, Aunt Reed. How are you, dear aunt?”I had once vowed that I would never call her aunt again: I thought itno sin to forget and break that vow now. My fingers had fastened on herhand which lay outside the sheet: had she pressed mine kindly, I shouldat that moment have experienced true pleasure. But unimpressionablenatures are not so soon softened, nor are natural antipathies soreadily eradicated. Mrs. Reed took her hand away, and, turning her facerather from me, she remarked that the night was warm. Again sheregarded me so icily, I felt at once that her opinion of me—her feelingtowards me—was unchanged and unchangeable. I knew by her stonyeye—opaque to tenderness, indissoluble to tears—that she was resolvedto consider me bad to the last; because to believe me good would giveher no generous pleasure: only a sense of mortification.I felt pain, and then I felt ire; and then I felt a determination tosubdue her—to be her mistress in spite both of her nature and her will.My tears had risen, just as in childhood: I ordered them back to theirsource. I brought a chair to the bed-head: I sat down and leaned overthe pillow.“You sent for me,” I said, “and I am here; and it is my intention tostay till I see how you get on.”“Oh, of course! You have seen my daughters?”“Yes.”“Well, you may tell them I wish you to stay till I can talk some thingsover with you I have on my mind: to-night it is too late, and I have adifficulty in recalling them. But there was something I wished tosay—let me see—”The wandering look and changed utterance told what wreck had takenplace in her once vigorous frame. Turning restlessly, she drew thebedclothes round her; my elbow, resting on a corner of the quilt, fixedit down: she was at once irritated.“Sit up!” said she; “don’t annoy me with holding the clothes fast. Areyou Jane Eyre?”“I am Jane Eyre.”“I have had more trouble with that child than any one would believe.Such a burden to be left on my hands—and so much annoyance as shecaused me, daily and hourly, with her incomprehensible disposition, andher sudden starts of temper, and her continual, unnatural watchings ofone’s movements! I declare she talked to me once like something mad, orlike a fiend—no child ever spoke or looked as she did; I was glad toget her away from the house. What did they do with her at Lowood? Thefever broke out there, and many of the pupils died. She, however, didnot die: but I said she did—I wish she had died!”“A strange wish, Mrs. Reed; why do you hate her so?”“I had a dislike to her mother always; for she was my husband’s onlysister, and a great favourite with him: he opposed the family’sdisowning her when she made her low marriage; and when news came of herdeath, he wept like a simpleton. He would send for the baby; though Ientreated him rather to put it out to nurse and pay for itsmaintenance. I hated it the first time I set my eyes on it—a sickly,whining, pining thing! It would wail in its cradle all night long—notscreaming heartily like any other child, but whimpering and moaning.Reed pitied it; and he used to nurse it and notice it as if it had beenhis own: more, indeed, than he ever noticed his own at that age. Hewould try to make my children friendly to the little beggar: thedarlings could not bear it, and he was angry with them when they showedtheir dislike. In his last illness, he had it brought continually tohis bedside; and but an hour before he died, he bound me by vow to keepthe creature. I would as soon have been charged with a pauper brat outof a workhouse: but he was weak, naturally weak. John does not at allresemble his father, and I am glad of it: John is like me and like mybrothers—he is quite a Gibson. Oh, I wish he would cease tormenting mewith letters for money! I have no more money to give him: we aregetting poor. I must send away half the servants and shut up part ofthe house; or let it off. I can never submit to do that—yet how are weto get on? Two-thirds of my income goes in paying the interest ofmortgages. John gambles dreadfully, and always loses—poor boy! He isbeset by sharpers: John is sunk and degraded—his look is frightful—Ifeel ashamed for him when I see him.”She was getting much excited. “I think I had better leave her now,”said I to Bessie, who stood on the other side of the bed.“Perhaps you had, Miss: but she often talks in this way towardsnight—in the morning she is calmer.”I rose. “Stop!” exclaimed Mrs. Reed, “there is another thing I wishedto say. He threatens me—he continually threatens me with his own death,or mine: and I dream sometimes that I see him laid out with a greatwound in his throat, or with a swollen and blackened face. I am come toa strange pass: I have heavy troubles. What is to be done? How is themoney to be had?”Bessie now endeavoured to persuade her to take a sedative draught: shesucceeded with difficulty. Soon after, Mrs. Reed grew more composed,and sank into a dozing state. I then left her.More than ten days elapsed before I had again any conversation withher. She continued either delirious or lethargic; and the doctorforbade everything which could painfully excite her. Meantime, I got onas well as I could with Georgiana and Eliza. They were very cold,indeed, at first. Eliza would sit half the day sewing, reading, orwriting, and scarcely utter a word either to me or her sister.Georgiana would chatter nonsense to her canary bird by the hour, andtake no notice of me. But I was determined not to seem at a loss foroccupation or amusement: I had brought my drawing materials with me,and they served me for both.Provided with a case of pencils, and some sheets of paper, I used totake a seat apart from them, near the window, and busy myself insketching fancy vignettes, representing any scene that happenedmomentarily to shape itself in the ever-shifting kaleidoscope ofimagination: a glimpse of sea between two rocks; the rising moon, and aship crossing its disk; a group of reeds and water-flags, and a naiad’shead, crowned with lotus-flowers, rising out of them; an elf sitting ina hedge-sparrow’s nest, under a wreath of hawthorn-bloom.One morning I fell to sketching a face: what sort of a face it was tobe, I did not care or know. I took a soft black pencil, gave it a broadpoint, and worked away. Soon I had traced on the paper a broad andprominent forehead and a square lower outline of visage: that contourgave me pleasure; my fingers proceeded actively to fill it withfeatures. Strongly-marked horizontal eyebrows must be traced under thatbrow; then followed, naturally, a well-defined nose, with a straightridge and full nostrils; then a flexible-looking mouth, by no meansnarrow; then a firm chin, with a decided cleft down the middle of it:of course, some black whiskers were wanted, and some jetty hair, tuftedon the temples, and waved above the forehead. Now for the eyes: I hadleft them to the last, because they required the most careful working.I drew them large; I shaped them well: the eyelashes I traced long andsombre; the irids lustrous and large. “Good! but not quite the thing,”I thought, as I surveyed the effect: “they want more force and spirit;”and I wrought the shades blacker, that the lights might flash morebrilliantly—a happy touch or two secured success. There, I had afriend’s face under my gaze; and what did it signify that those youngladies turned their backs on me? I looked at it; I smiled at thespeaking likeness: I was absorbed and content.“Is that a portrait of some one you know?” asked Eliza, who hadapproached me unnoticed. I responded that it was merely a fancy head,and hurried it beneath the other sheets. Of course, I lied: it was, infact, a very faithful representation of Mr. Rochester. But what wasthat to her, or to any one but myself? Georgiana also advanced to look.The other drawings pleased her much, but she called that “an ugly man.”They both seemed surprised at my skill. I offered to sketch theirportraits; and each, in turn, sat for a pencil outline. Then Georgianaproduced her album. I promised to contribute a water-colour drawing:this put her at once into good humour. She proposed a walk in thegrounds. Before we had been out two hours, we were deep in aconfidential conversation: she had favoured me with a description ofthe brilliant winter she had spent in London two seasons ago—of theadmiration she had there excited—the attention she had received; and Ieven got hints of the titled conquest she had made. In the course ofthe afternoon and evening these hints were enlarged on: various softconversations were reported, and sentimental scenes represented; and,in short, a volume of a novel of fashionable life was that dayimprovised by her for my benefit. The communications were renewed fromday to day: they always ran on the same theme—herself, her loves, andwoes. It was strange she never once adverted either to her mother’sillness, or her brother’s death, or the present gloomy state of thefamily prospects. Her mind seemed wholly taken up with reminiscences ofpast gaiety, and aspirations after dissipations to come. She passedabout five minutes each day in her mother’s sick-room, and no more.Eliza still spoke little: she had evidently no time to talk. I neversaw a busier person than she seemed to be; yet it was difficult to saywhat she did: or rather, to discover any result of her diligence. Shehad an alarm to call her up early. I know not how she occupied herselfbefore breakfast, but after that meal she divided her time into regularportions, and each hour had its allotted task. Three times a day shestudied a little book, which I found, on inspection, was a CommonPrayer Book. I asked her once what was the great attraction of thatvolume, and she said, “the Rubric.” Three hours she gave to stitching,with gold thread, the border of a square crimson cloth, almost largeenough for a carpet. In answer to my inquiries after the use of thisarticle, she informed me it was a covering for the altar of a newchurch lately erected near Gateshead. Two hours she devoted to herdiary; two to working by herself in the kitchen-garden; and one to theregulation of her accounts. She seemed to want no company; noconversation. I believe she was happy in her way: this routine sufficedfor her; and nothing annoyed her so much as the occurrence of anyincident which forced her to vary its clockwork regularity.She told me one evening, when more disposed to be communicative thanusual, that John’s conduct, and the threatened ruin of the family, hadbeen a source of profound affliction to her: but she had now, she said,settled her mind, and formed her resolution. Her own fortune she hadtaken care to secure; and when her mother died—and it was whollyimprobable, she tranquilly remarked, that she should either recover orlinger long—she would execute a long-cherished project: seek aretirement where punctual habits would be permanently secured fromdisturbance, and place safe barriers between herself and a frivolousworld. I asked if Georgiana would accompany her.“Of course not. Georgiana and she had nothing in common: they never hadhad. She would not be burdened with her society for any consideration.Georgiana should take her own course; and she, Eliza, would take hers.”Georgiana, when not unburdening her heart to me, spent most of her timein lying on the sofa, fretting about the dulness of the house, andwishing over and over again that her aunt Gibson would send her aninvitation up to town. “It would be so much better,” she said, “if shecould only get out of the way for a month or two, till all was over.” Idid not ask what she meant by “all being over,” but I suppose shereferred to the expected decease of her mother and the gloomy sequel offuneral rites. Eliza generally took no more notice of her sister’sindolence and complaints than if no such murmuring, lounging object hadbeen before her. One day, however, as she put away her account-book andunfolded her embroidery, she suddenly took her up thus—“Georgiana, a more vain and absurd animal than you was certainly neverallowed to cumber the earth. You had no right to be born, for you makeno use of life. Instead of living for, in, and with yourself, as areasonable being ought, you seek only to fasten your feebleness on someother person’s strength: if no one can be found willing to burden heror himself with such a fat, weak, puffy, useless thing, you cry outthat you are ill-treated, neglected, miserable. Then, too, existencefor you must be a scene of continual change and excitement, or else theworld is a dungeon: you must be admired, you must be courted, you mustbe flattered—you must have music, dancing, and society—or you languish,you die away. Have you no sense to devise a system which will make youindependent of all efforts, and all wills, but your own? Take one day;share it into sections; to each section apportion its task: leave nostray unemployed quarters of an hour, ten minutes, five minutes—includeall; do each piece of business in its turn with method, with rigidregularity. The day will close almost before you are aware it hasbegun; and you are indebted to no one for helping you to get rid of onevacant moment: you have had to seek no one’s company, conversation,sympathy, forbearance; you have lived, in short, as an independentbeing ought to do. Take this advice: the first and last I shall offeryou; then you will not want me or any one else, happen what may.Neglect it—go on as heretofore, craving, whining, and idling—and sufferthe results of your idiocy, however bad and insufferable they may be. Itell you this plainly; and listen: for though I shall no more repeatwhat I am now about to say, I shall steadily act on it. After mymother’s death, I wash my hands of you: from the day her coffin iscarried to the vault in Gateshead Church, you and I will be as separateas if we had never known each other. You need not think that because wechanced to be born of the same parents, I shall suffer you to fasten medown by even the feeblest claim: I can tell you this—if the whole humanrace, ourselves excepted, were swept away, and we two stood alone onthe earth, I would leave you in the old world, and betake myself to thenew.”She closed her lips.“You might have spared yourself the trouble of delivering that tirade,”answered Georgiana. “Everybody knows you are the most selfish,heartless creature in existence: and _I_ know your spiteful hatredtowards me: I have had a specimen of it before in the trick you playedme about Lord Edwin Vere: you could not bear me to be raised above you,to have a title, to be received into circles where you dare not showyour face, and so you acted the spy and informer, and ruined myprospects for ever.” Georgiana took out her handkerchief and blew hernose for an hour afterwards; Eliza sat cold, impassable, andassiduously industrious.True, generous feeling is made small account of by some, but here weretwo natures rendered, the one intolerably acrid, the other despicablysavourless for the want of it. Feeling without judgment is a washydraught indeed; but judgment untempered by feeling is too bitter andhusky a morsel for human deglutition.It was a wet and windy afternoon: Georgiana had fallen asleep on thesofa over the perusal of a novel; Eliza was gone to attend asaint’s-day service at the new church—for in matters of religion shewas a rigid formalist: no weather ever prevented the punctual dischargeof what she considered her devotional duties; fair or foul, she went tochurch thrice every Sunday, and as often on week-days as there wereprayers.I bethought myself to go upstairs and see how the dying woman sped, wholay there almost unheeded: the very servants paid her but a remittentattention: the hired nurse, being little looked after, would slip outof the room whenever she could. Bessie was faithful; but she had herown family to mind, and could only come occasionally to the hall. Ifound the sick-room unwatched, as I had expected: no nurse was there;the patient lay still, and seemingly lethargic; her livid face sunk inthe pillows: the fire was dying in the grate. I renewed the fuel,re-arranged the bedclothes, gazed awhile on her who could not now gazeon me, and then I moved away to the window.The rain beat strongly against the panes, the wind blew tempestuously:“One lies there,” I thought, “who will soon be beyond the war ofearthly elements. Whither will that spirit—now struggling to quit itsmaterial tenement—flit when at length released?”In pondering the great mystery, I thought of Helen Burns, recalled herdying words—her faith—her doctrine of the equality of disembodiedsouls. I was still listening in thought to her well-rememberedtones—still picturing her pale and spiritual aspect, her wasted faceand sublime gaze, as she lay on her placid deathbed, and whispered herlonging to be restored to her divine Father’s bosom—when a feeble voicemurmured from the couch behind: “Who is that?”I knew Mrs. Reed had not spoken for days: was she reviving? I went upto her.“It is I, Aunt Reed.”“Who—I?” was her answer. “Who are you?” looking at me with surprise anda sort of alarm, but still not wildly. “You are quite a stranger tome—where is Bessie?”“She is at the lodge, aunt.”“Aunt,” she repeated. “Who calls me aunt? You are not one of theGibsons; and yet I know you—that face, and the eyes and forehead, arequiet familiar to me: you are like—why, you are like Jane Eyre!”I said nothing: I was afraid of occasioning some shock by declaring myidentity.“Yet,” said she, “I am afraid it is a mistake: my thoughts deceive me.I wished to see Jane Eyre, and I fancy a likeness where none exists:besides, in eight years she must be so changed.” I now gently assuredher that I was the person she supposed and desired me to be: and seeingthat I was understood, and that her senses were quite collected, Iexplained how Bessie had sent her husband to fetch me from Thornfield.“I am very ill, I know,” she said ere long. “I was trying to turnmyself a few minutes since, and find I cannot move a limb. It is aswell I should ease my mind before I die: what we think little of inhealth, burdens us at such an hour as the present is to me. Is thenurse here? or is there no one in the room but you?”I assured her we were alone.“Well, I have twice done you a wrong which I regret now. One was inbreaking the promise which I gave my husband to bring you up as my ownchild; the other—” she stopped. “After all, it is of no greatimportance, perhaps,” she murmured to herself: “and then I may getbetter; and to humble myself so to her is painful.”She made an effort to alter her position, but failed: her face changed;she seemed to experience some inward sensation—the precursor, perhaps,of the last pang.“Well, I must get it over. Eternity is before me: I had better tellher.—Go to my dressing-case, open it, and take out a letter you willsee there.”I obeyed her directions. “Read the letter,” she said.It was short, and thus conceived:—“MADAM,—“Will you have the goodness to send me the address of my niece, JaneEyre, and to tell me how she is? It is my intention to write shortlyand desire her to come to me at Madeira. Providence has blessed myendeavours to secure a competency; and as I am unmarried and childless,I wish to adopt her during my life, and bequeath her at my deathwhatever I may have to leave.I am, Madam, &c., &c.,“JOHN EYRE, Madeira.”It was dated three years back.“Why did I never hear of this?” I asked.“Because I disliked you too fixedly and thoroughly ever to lend a handin lifting you to prosperity. I could not forget your conduct to me,Jane—the fury with which you once turned on me; the tone in which youdeclared you abhorred me the worst of anybody in the world; theunchildlike look and voice with which you affirmed that the verythought of me made you sick, and asserted that I had treated you withmiserable cruelty. I could not forget my own sensations when you thusstarted up and poured out the venom of your mind: I felt fear as if ananimal that I had struck or pushed had looked up at me with human eyesand cursed me in a man’s voice.—Bring me some water! Oh, make haste!”“Dear Mrs. Reed,” said I, as I offered her the draught she required,“think no more of all this, let it pass away from your mind. Forgive mefor my passionate language: I was a child then; eight, nine years havepassed since that day.”She heeded nothing of what I said; but when she had tasted the waterand drawn breath, she went on thus—“I tell you I could not forget it; and I took my revenge: for you to beadopted by your uncle, and placed in a state of ease and comfort, waswhat I could not endure. I wrote to him; I said I was sorry for hisdisappointment, but Jane Eyre was dead: she had died of typhus fever atLowood. Now act as you please: write and contradict my assertion—exposemy falsehood as soon as you like. You were born, I think, to be mytorment: my last hour is racked by the recollection of a deed which,but for you, I should never have been tempted to commit.”“If you could but be persuaded to think no more of it, aunt, and toregard me with kindness and forgiveness——”“You have a very bad disposition,” said she, “and one to this day Ifeel it impossible to understand: how for nine years you could bepatient and quiescent under any treatment, and in the tenth break outall fire and violence, I can never comprehend.”“My disposition is not so bad as you think: I am passionate, but notvindictive. Many a time, as a little child, I should have been glad tolove you if you would have let me; and I long earnestly to bereconciled to you now: kiss me, aunt.”I approached my cheek to her lips: she would not touch it. She said Ioppressed her by leaning over the bed, and again demanded water. As Ilaid her down—for I raised her and supported her on my arm while shedrank—I covered her ice-cold and clammy hand with mine: the feeblefingers shrank from my touch—the glazing eyes shunned my gaze.“Love me, then, or hate me, as you will,” I said at last, “you have myfull and free forgiveness: ask now for God’s, and be at peace.”Poor, suffering woman! it was too late for her to make now the effortto change her habitual frame of mind: living, she had ever hatedme—dying, she must hate me still.The nurse now entered, and Bessie followed. I yet lingered half-an-hourlonger, hoping to see some sign of amity: but she gave none. She wasfast relapsing into stupor; nor did her mind again rally: at twelveo’clock that night she died. I was not present to close her eyes, norwere either of her daughters. They came to tell us the next morningthat all was over. She was by that time laid out. Eliza and I went tolook at her: Georgiana, who had burst out into loud weeping, said shedared not go. There was stretched Sarah Reed’s once robust and activeframe, rigid and still: her eye of flint was covered with its cold lid;her brow and strong traits wore yet the impress of her inexorable soul.A strange and solemn object was that corpse to me. I gazed on it withgloom and pain: nothing soft, nothing sweet, nothing pitying, orhopeful, or subduing did it inspire; only a grating anguish for _her_woes—not _my_ loss—and a sombre tearless dismay at the fearfulness ofdeath in such a form.Eliza surveyed her parent calmly. After a silence of some minutes sheobserved—“With her constitution she should have lived to a good old age: herlife was shortened by trouble.” And then a spasm constricted her mouthfor an instant: as it passed away she turned and left the room, and sodid I. Neither of us had dropt a tear.CHAPTER XXIIMr. Rochester had given me but one week’s leave of absence: yet a monthelapsed before I quitted Gateshead. I wished to leave immediately afterthe funeral, but Georgiana entreated me to stay till she could get offto London, whither she was now at last invited by her uncle, Mr.Gibson, who had come down to direct his sister’s interment and settlethe family affairs. Georgiana said she dreaded being left alone withEliza; from her she got neither sympathy in her dejection, support inher fears, nor aid in her preparations; so I bore with herfeeble-minded wailings and selfish lamentations as well as I could, anddid my best in sewing for her and packing her dresses. It is true, thatwhile I worked, she would idle; and I thought to myself, “If you and Iwere destined to live always together, cousin, we would commencematters on a different footing. I should not settle tamely down intobeing the forbearing party; I should assign you your share of labour,and compel you to accomplish it, or else it should be left undone: Ishould insist, also, on your keeping some of those drawling,half-insincere complaints hushed in your own breast. It is only becauseour connection happens to be very transitory, and comes at a peculiarlymournful season, that I consent thus to render it so patient andcompliant on my part.”At last I saw Georgiana off; but now it was Eliza’s turn to request meto stay another week. Her plans required all her time and attention,she said; she was about to depart for some unknown bourne; and all daylong she stayed in her own room, her door bolted within, fillingtrunks, emptying drawers, burning papers, and holding no communicationwith any one. She wished me to look after the house, to see callers,and answer notes of condolence.One morning she told me I was at liberty. “And,” she added, “I amobliged to you for your valuable services and discreet conduct! Thereis some difference between living with such an one as you and withGeorgiana: you perform your own part in life and burden no one.To-morrow,” she continued, “I set out for the Continent. I shall takeup my abode in a religious house near Lisle—a nunnery you would callit; there I shall be quiet and unmolested. I shall devote myself for atime to the examination of the Roman Catholic dogmas, and to a carefulstudy of the workings of their system: if I find it to be, as I halfsuspect it is, the one best calculated to ensure the doing of allthings decently and in order, I shall embrace the tenets of Rome andprobably take the veil.”I neither expressed surprise at this resolution nor attempted todissuade her from it. “The vocation will fit you to a hair,” I thought:“much good may it do you!”When we parted, she said: “Good-bye, cousin Jane Eyre; I wish you well:you have some sense.”I then returned: “You are not without sense, cousin Eliza; but what youhave, I suppose, in another year will be walled up alive in a Frenchconvent. However, it is not my business, and so it suits you, I don’tmuch care.”“You are in the right,” said she; and with these words we each went ourseparate way. As I shall not have occasion to refer either to her orher sister again, I may as well mention here, that Georgiana made anadvantageous match with a wealthy worn-out man of fashion, and thatEliza actually took the veil, and is at this day superior of theconvent where she passed the period of her novitiate, and which sheendowed with her fortune.How people feel when they are returning home from an absence, long orshort, I did not know: I had never experienced the sensation. I hadknown what it was to come back to Gateshead when a child after a longwalk, to be scolded for looking cold or gloomy; and later, what it wasto come back from church to Lowood, to long for a plenteous meal and agood fire, and to be unable to get either. Neither of these returningswas very pleasant or desirable: no magnet drew me to a given point,increasing in its strength of attraction the nearer I came. The returnto Thornfield was yet to be tried.My journey seemed tedious—very tedious: fifty miles one day, a nightspent at an inn; fifty miles the next day. During the first twelvehours I thought of Mrs. Reed in her last moments; I saw her disfiguredand discoloured face, and heard her strangely altered voice. I mused onthe funeral day, the coffin, the hearse, the black train of tenants andservants—few was the number of relatives—the gaping vault, the silentchurch, the solemn service. Then I thought of Eliza and Georgiana; Ibeheld one the cynosure of a ball-room, the other the inmate of aconvent cell; and I dwelt on and analysed their separate peculiaritiesof person and character. The evening arrival at the great town of ——scattered these thoughts; night gave them quite another turn: laid downon my traveller’s bed, I left reminiscence for anticipation.I was going back to Thornfield: but how long was I to stay there? Notlong; of that I was sure. I had heard from Mrs. Fairfax in the interimof my absence: the party at the hall was dispersed; Mr. Rochester hadleft for London three weeks ago, but he was then expected to return ina fortnight. Mrs. Fairfax surmised that he was gone to makearrangements for his wedding, as he had talked of purchasing a newcarriage: she said the idea of his marrying Miss Ingram still seemedstrange to her; but from what everybody said, and from what she hadherself seen, she could no longer doubt that the event would shortlytake place. “You would be strangely incredulous if you did doubt it,”was my mental comment. “I don’t doubt it.”The question followed, “Where was I to go?” I dreamt of Miss Ingram allthe night: in a vivid morning dream I saw her closing the gates ofThornfield against me and pointing me out another road; and Mr.Rochester looked on with his arms folded—smiling sardonically, as itseemed, at both her and me.I had not notified to Mrs. Fairfax the exact day of my return; for Idid not wish either car or carriage to meet me at Millcote. I proposedto walk the distance quietly by myself; and very quietly, after leavingmy box in the ostler’s care, did I slip away from the George Inn, aboutsix o’clock of a June evening, and take the old road to Thornfield: aroad which lay chiefly through fields, and was now little frequented.It was not a bright or splendid summer evening, though fair and soft:the haymakers were at work all along the road; and the sky, though farfrom cloudless, was such as promised well for the future: itsblue—where blue was visible—was mild and settled, and its cloud stratahigh and thin. The west, too, was warm: no watery gleam chilled it—itseemed as if there was a fire lit, an altar burning behind its screenof marbled vapour, and out of apertures shone a golden redness.I felt glad as the road shortened before me: so glad that I stoppedonce to ask myself what that joy meant: and to remind reason that itwas not to my home I was going, or to a permanent resting-place, or toa place where fond friends looked out for me and waited my arrival.“Mrs. Fairfax will smile you a calm welcome, to be sure,” said I; “andlittle Adèle will clap her hands and jump to see you: but you know verywell you are thinking of another than they, and that he is not thinkingof you.”But what is so headstrong as youth? What so blind as inexperience?These affirmed that it was pleasure enough to have the privilege ofagain looking on Mr. Rochester, whether he looked on me or not; andthey added—“Hasten! hasten! be with him while you may: but a few moredays or weeks, at most, and you are parted from him for ever!” And thenI strangled a new-born agony—a deformed thing which I could notpersuade myself to own and rear—and ran on.They are making hay, too, in Thornfield meadows: or rather, thelabourers are just quitting their work, and returning home with theirrakes on their shoulders, now, at the hour I arrive. I have but a fieldor two to traverse, and then I shall cross the road and reach thegates. How full the hedges are of roses! But I have no time to gatherany; I want to be at the house. I passed a tall briar, shooting leafyand flowery branches across the path; I see the narrow stile with stonesteps; and I see—Mr. Rochester sitting there, a book and a pencil inhis hand; he is writing.Well, he is not a ghost; yet every nerve I have is unstrung: for amoment I am beyond my own mastery. What does it mean? I did not think Ishould tremble in this way when I saw him, or lose my voice or thepower of motion in his presence. I will go back as soon as I can stir:I need not make an absolute fool of myself. I know another way to thehouse. It does not signify if I knew twenty ways; for he has seen me.“Hillo!” he cries; and he puts up his book and his pencil. “There youare! Come on, if you please.”I suppose I do come on; though in what fashion I know not; beingscarcely cognisant of my movements, and solicitous only to appear calm;and, above all, to control the working muscles of my face—which I feelrebel insolently against my will, and struggle to express what I hadresolved to conceal. But I have a veil—it is down: I may make shift yetto behave with decent composure.“And this is Jane Eyre? Are you coming from Millcote, and on foot?Yes—just one of your tricks: not to send for a carriage, and comeclattering over street and road like a common mortal, but to steal intothe vicinage of your home along with twilight, just as if you were adream or a shade. What the deuce have you done with yourself this lastmonth?”“I have been with my aunt, sir, who is dead.”“A true Janian reply! Good angels be my guard! She comes from the otherworld—from the abode of people who are dead; and tells me so when shemeets me alone here in the gloaming! If I dared, I’d touch you, to seeif you are substance or shadow, you elf!—but I’d as soon offer to takehold of a blue _ignis fatuus_ light in a marsh. Truant! truant!” headded, when he had paused an instant. “Absent from me a whole month,and forgetting me quite, I’ll be sworn!”I knew there would be pleasure in meeting my master again, even thoughbroken by the fear that he was so soon to cease to be my master, and bythe knowledge that I was nothing to him: but there was ever in Mr.Rochester (so at least I thought) such a wealth of the power ofcommunicating happiness, that to taste but of the crumbs he scatteredto stray and stranger birds like me, was to feast genially. His lastwords were balm: they seemed to imply that it imported something to himwhether I forgot him or not. And he had spoken of Thornfield as myhome—would that it were my home!He did not leave the stile, and I hardly liked to ask to go by. Iinquired soon if he had not been to London.“Yes; I suppose you found that out by second-sight.”“Mrs. Fairfax told me in a letter.”“And did she inform you what I went to do?”“Oh, yes, sir! Everybody knew your errand.”“You must see the carriage, Jane, and tell me if you don’t think itwill suit Mrs. Rochester exactly; and whether she won’t look like QueenBoadicea, leaning back against those purple cushions. I wish, Jane, Iwere a trifle better adapted to match with her externally. Tell me now,fairy as you are—can’t you give me a charm, or a philter, or somethingof that sort, to make me a handsome man?”“It would be past the power of magic, sir;” and, in thought, I added,“A loving eye is all the charm needed: to such you are handsome enough;or rather your sternness has a power beyond beauty.”Mr. Rochester had sometimes read my unspoken thoughts with an acumen tome incomprehensible: in the present instance he took no notice of myabrupt vocal response; but he smiled at me with a certain smile he hadof his own, and which he used but on rare occasions. He seemed to thinkit too good for common purposes: it was the real sunshine of feeling—heshed it over me now.“Pass, Janet,” said he, making room for me to cross the stile: “go uphome, and stay your weary little wandering feet at a friend’sthreshold.”All I had now to do was to obey him in silence: no need for me tocolloquise further. I got over the stile without a word, and meant toleave him calmly. An impulse held me fast—a force turned me round. Isaid—or something in me said for me, and in spite of me—“Thank you, Mr. Rochester, for your great kindness. I am strangely gladto get back again to you: and wherever you are is my home—my onlyhome.”I walked on so fast that even he could hardly have overtaken me had hetried. Little Adèle was half wild with delight when she saw me. Mrs.Fairfax received me with her usual plain friendliness. Leah smiled, andeven Sophie bid me “bon soir” with glee. This was very pleasant; thereis no happiness like that of being loved by your fellow-creatures, andfeeling that your presence is an addition to their comfort.I that evening shut my eyes resolutely against the future: I stopped myears against the voice that kept warning me of near separation andcoming grief. When tea was over and Mrs. Fairfax had taken herknitting, and I had assumed a low seat near her, and Adèle, kneeling onthe carpet, had nestled close up to me, and a sense of mutual affectionseemed to surround us with a ring of golden peace, I uttered a silentprayer that we might not be parted far or soon; but when, as we thussat, Mr. Rochester entered, unannounced, and looking at us, seemed totake pleasure in the spectacle of a group so amicable—when he said hesupposed the old lady was all right now that she had got her adopteddaughter back again, and added that he saw Adèle was “prête à croquersa petite maman Anglaise”—I half ventured to hope that he would, evenafter his marriage, keep us together somewhere under the shelter of hisprotection, and not quite exiled from the sunshine of his presence.A fortnight of dubious calm succeeded my return to Thornfield Hall.Nothing was said of the master’s marriage, and I saw no preparationgoing on for such an event. Almost every day I asked Mrs. Fairfax ifshe had yet heard anything decided: her answer was always in thenegative. Once she said she had actually put the question to Mr.Rochester as to when he was going to bring his bride home; but he hadanswered her only by a joke and one of his queer looks, and she couldnot tell what to make of him.One thing specially surprised me, and that was, there were nojourneyings backward and forward, no visits to Ingram Park: to be sureit was twenty miles off, on the borders of another county; but what wasthat distance to an ardent lover? To so practised and indefatigable ahorseman as Mr. Rochester, it would be but a morning’s ride. I began tocherish hopes I had no right to conceive: that the match was brokenoff; that rumour had been mistaken; that one or both parties hadchanged their minds. I used to look at my master’s face to see if itwere sad or fierce; but I could not remember the time when it had beenso uniformly clear of clouds or evil feelings. If, in the moments I andmy pupil spent with him, I lacked spirits and sank into inevitabledejection, he became even gay. Never had he called me more frequentlyto his presence; never been kinder to me when there—and, alas! neverhad I loved him so well.CHAPTER XXIIIA splendid Midsummer shone over England: skies so pure, suns so radiantas were then seen in long succession, seldom favour even singly, ourwave-girt land. It was as if a band of Italian days had come from theSouth, like a flock of glorious passenger birds, and lighted to restthem on the cliffs of Albion. The hay was all got in; the fields roundThornfield were green and shorn; the roads white and baked; the treeswere in their dark prime; hedge and wood, full-leaved and deeplytinted, contrasted well with the sunny hue of the cleared meadowsbetween.On Midsummer-eve, Adèle, weary with gathering wild strawberries in HayLane half the day, had gone to bed with the sun. I watched her dropasleep, and when I left her, I sought the garden.It was now the sweetest hour of the twenty-four:—“Day its fervid fireshad wasted,” and dew fell cool on panting plain and scorched summit.Where the sun had gone down in simple state—pure of the pomp ofclouds—spread a solemn purple, burning with the light of red jewel andfurnace flame at one point, on one hill-peak, and extending high andwide, soft and still softer, over half heaven. The east had its owncharm or fine deep blue, and its own modest gem, a rising and solitarystar: soon it would boast the moon; but she was yet beneath thehorizon.I walked a while on the pavement; but a subtle, well-known scent—thatof a cigar—stole from some window; I saw the library casement open ahandbreadth; I knew I might be watched thence; so I went apart into theorchard. No nook in the grounds more sheltered and more Eden-like; itwas full of trees, it bloomed with flowers: a very high wall shut itout from the court, on one side; on the other, a beech avenue screenedit from the lawn. At the bottom was a sunk fence; its sole separationfrom lonely fields: a winding walk, bordered with laurels andterminating in a giant horse-chestnut, circled at the base by a seat,led down to the fence. Here one could wander unseen. While suchhoney-dew fell, such silence reigned, such gloaming gathered, I felt asif I could haunt such shade for ever; but in threading the flower andfruit parterres at the upper part of the enclosure, enticed there bythe light the now rising moon cast on this more open quarter, my stepis stayed—not by sound, not by sight, but once more by a warningfragrance.Sweet-briar and southernwood, jasmine, pink, and rose have long beenyielding their evening sacrifice of incense: this new scent is neitherof shrub nor flower; it is—I know it well—it is Mr. Rochester’s cigar.I look round and I listen. I see trees laden with ripening fruit. Ihear a nightingale warbling in a wood half a mile off; no moving formis visible, no coming step audible; but that perfume increases: I mustflee. I make for the wicket leading to the shrubbery, and I see Mr.Rochester entering. I step aside into the ivy recess; he will not staylong: he will soon return whence he came, and if I sit still he willnever see me.But no—eventide is as pleasant to him as to me, and this antique gardenas attractive; and he strolls on, now lifting the gooseberry-treebranches to look at the fruit, large as plums, with which they areladen; now taking a ripe cherry from the wall; now stooping towards aknot of flowers, either to inhale their fragrance or to admire thedew-beads on their petals. A great moth goes humming by me; it alightson a plant at Mr. Rochester’s foot: he sees it, and bends to examineit.“Now, he has his back towards me,” thought I, “and he is occupied too;perhaps, if I walk softly, I can slip away unnoticed.”I trode on an edging of turf that the crackle of the pebbly gravelmight not betray me: he was standing among the beds at a yard or twodistant from where I had to pass; the moth apparently engaged him. “Ishall get by very well,” I meditated. As I crossed his shadow, thrownlong over the garden by the moon, not yet risen high, he said quietly,without turning—“Jane, come and look at this fellow.”I had made no noise: he had not eyes behind—could his shadow feel? Istarted at first, and then I approached him.“Look at his wings,” said he, “he reminds me rather of a West Indianinsect; one does not often see so large and gay a night-rover inEngland; there! he is flown.”The moth roamed away. I was sheepishly retreating also; but Mr.Rochester followed me, and when we reached the wicket, he said—“Turn back: on so lovely a night it is a shame to sit in the house; andsurely no one can wish to go to bed while sunset is thus at meetingwith moonrise.”It is one of my faults, that though my tongue is sometimes promptenough at an answer, there are times when it sadly fails me in framingan excuse; and always the lapse occurs at some crisis, when a facileword or plausible pretext is specially wanted to get me out of painfulembarrassment. I did not like to walk at this hour alone with Mr.Rochester in the shadowy orchard; but I could not find a reason toallege for leaving him. I followed with lagging step, and thoughtsbusily bent on discovering a means of extrication; but he himselflooked so composed and so grave also, I became ashamed of feeling anyconfusion: the evil—if evil existent or prospective there was—seemed tolie with me only; his mind was unconscious and quiet.“Jane,” he recommenced, as we entered the laurel walk, and slowlystrayed down in the direction of the sunk fence and the horse-chestnut,“Thornfield is a pleasant place in summer, is it not?”“Yes, sir.”“You must have become in some degree attached to the house,—you, whohave an eye for natural beauties, and a good deal of the organ ofAdhesiveness?”“I am attached to it, indeed.”“And though I don’t comprehend how it is, I perceive you have acquireda degree of regard for that foolish little child Adèle, too; and evenfor simple dame Fairfax?”“Yes, sir; in different ways, I have an affection for both.”“And would be sorry to part with them?”“Yes.”“Pity!” he said, and sighed and paused. “It is always the way of eventsin this life,” he continued presently: “no sooner have you got settledin a pleasant resting-place, than a voice calls out to you to rise andmove on, for the hour of repose is expired.”“Must I move on, sir?” I asked. “Must I leave Thornfield?”“I believe you must, Jane. I am sorry, Janet, but I believe indeed youmust.”This was a blow: but I did not let it prostrate me.“Well, sir, I shall be ready when the order to march comes.”“It is come now—I must give it to-night.”“Then you _are_ going to be married, sir?”“Ex-act-ly—pre-cise-ly: with your usual acuteness, you have hit thenail straight on the head.”“Soon, sir?”“Very soon, my—that is, Miss Eyre: and you’ll remember, Jane, the firsttime I, or Rumour, plainly intimated to you that it was my intention toput my old bachelor’s neck into the sacred noose, to enter into theholy estate of matrimony—to take Miss Ingram to my bosom, in short(she’s an extensive armful: but that’s not to the point—one can’t havetoo much of such a very excellent thing as my beautiful Blanche): well,as I was saying—listen to me, Jane! You’re not turning your head tolook after more moths, are you? That was only a lady-clock, child,‘flying away home.’ I wish to remind you that it was you who first saidto me, with that discretion I respect in you—with that foresight,prudence, and humility which befit your responsible and dependentposition—that in case I married Miss Ingram, both you and little Adèlehad better trot forthwith. I pass over the sort of slur conveyed inthis suggestion on the character of my beloved; indeed, when you arefar away, Janet, I’ll try to forget it: I shall notice only its wisdom;which is such that I have made it my law of action. Adèle must go toschool; and you, Miss Eyre, must get a new situation.”“Yes, sir, I will advertise immediately: and meantime, I suppose—” Iwas going to say, “I suppose I may stay here, till I find anothershelter to betake myself to:” but I stopped, feeling it would not do torisk a long sentence, for my voice was not quite under command.“In about a month I hope to be a bridegroom,” continued Mr. Rochester;“and in the interim, I shall myself look out for employment and anasylum for you.”“Thank you, sir; I am sorry to give—”“Oh, no need to apologise! I consider that when a dependent does herduty as well as you have done yours, she has a sort of claim upon heremployer for any little assistance he can conveniently render her;indeed I have already, through my future mother-in-law, heard of aplace that I think will suit: it is to undertake the education of thefive daughters of Mrs. Dionysius O’Gall of Bitternutt Lodge, Connaught,Ireland. You’ll like Ireland, I think: they’re such warm-hearted peoplethere, they say.”“It is a long way off, sir.”“No matter—a girl of your sense will not object to the voyage or thedistance.”“Not the voyage, but the distance: and then the sea is a barrier—”“From what, Jane?”“From England and from Thornfield: and—”“Well?”“From _you_, sir.”I said this almost involuntarily, and, with as little sanction of freewill, my tears gushed out. I did not cry so as to be heard, however; Iavoided sobbing. The thought of Mrs. O’Gall and Bitternutt Lodge struckcold to my heart; and colder the thought of all the brine and foam,destined, as it seemed, to rush between me and the master at whose sideI now walked, and coldest the remembrance of the wider ocean—wealth,caste, custom intervened between me and what I naturally and inevitablyloved.“It is a long way,” I again said.“It is, to be sure; and when you get to Bitternutt Lodge, Connaught,Ireland, I shall never see you again, Jane: that’s morally certain. Inever go over to Ireland, not having myself much of a fancy for thecountry. We have been good friends, Jane; have we not?”“Yes, sir.”“And when friends are on the eve of separation, they like to spend thelittle time that remains to them close to each other. Come! we’ll talkover the voyage and the parting quietly half-an-hour or so, while thestars enter into their shining life up in heaven yonder: here is thechestnut tree: here is the bench at its old roots. Come, we will sitthere in peace to-night, though we should never more be destined to sitthere together.” He seated me and himself.“It is a long way to Ireland, Janet, and I am sorry to send my littlefriend on such weary travels: but if I can’t do better, how is it to behelped? Are you anything akin to me, do you think, Jane?”I could risk no sort of answer by this time: my heart was still.“Because,” he said, “I sometimes have a queer feeling with regard toyou—especially when you are near me, as now: it is as if I had a stringsomewhere under my left ribs, tightly and inextricably knotted to asimilar string situated in the corresponding quarter of your littleframe. And if that boisterous Channel, and two hundred miles or so ofland come broad between us, I am afraid that cord of communion will besnapt; and then I’ve a nervous notion I should take to bleedinginwardly. As for you,—you’d forget me.”“That I _never_ should, sir: you know—” Impossible to proceed.“Jane, do you hear that nightingale singing in the wood? Listen!”In listening, I sobbed convulsively; for I could repress what I enduredno longer; I was obliged to yield, and I was shaken from head to footwith acute distress. When I did speak, it was only to express animpetuous wish that I had never been born, or never come to Thornfield.“Because you are sorry to leave it?”The vehemence of emotion, stirred by grief and love within me, wasclaiming mastery, and struggling for full sway, and asserting a rightto predominate, to overcome, to live, rise, and reign at last: yes,—andto speak.“I grieve to leave Thornfield: I love Thornfield:—I love it, because Ihave lived in it a full and delightful life,—momentarily at least. Ihave not been trampled on. I have not been petrified. I have not beenburied with inferior minds, and excluded from every glimpse ofcommunion with what is bright and energetic and high. I have talked,face to face, with what I reverence, with what I delight in,—with anoriginal, a vigorous, an expanded mind. I have known you, Mr.Rochester; and it strikes me with terror and anguish to feel Iabsolutely must be torn from you for ever. I see the necessity ofdeparture; and it is like looking on the necessity of death.”“Where do you see the necessity?” he asked suddenly.“Where? You, sir, have placed it before me.”“In what shape?”“In the shape of Miss Ingram; a noble and beautiful woman,—your bride.”“My bride! What bride? I have no bride!”“But you will have.”“Yes;—I will!—I will!” He set his teeth.“Then I must go:—you have said it yourself.”“No: you must stay! I swear it—and the oath shall be kept.”“I tell you I must go!” I retorted, roused to something like passion.“Do you think I can stay to become nothing to you? Do you think I am anautomaton?—a machine without feelings? and can bear to have my morselof bread snatched from my lips, and my drop of living water dashed frommy cup? Do you think, because I am poor, obscure, plain, and little, Iam soulless and heartless? You think wrong!—I have as much soul asyou,—and full as much heart! And if God had gifted me with some beautyand much wealth, I should have made it as hard for you to leave me, asit is now for me to leave you. I am not talking to you now through themedium of custom, conventionalities, nor even of mortal flesh;—it is myspirit that addresses your spirit; just as if both had passed throughthe grave, and we stood at God’s feet, equal,—as we are!”“As we are!” repeated Mr. Rochester—“so,” he added, enclosing me in hisarms, gathering me to his breast, pressing his lips on my lips: “so,Jane!”“Yes, so, sir,” I rejoined: “and yet not so; for you are a marriedman—or as good as a married man, and wed to one inferior to you—to onewith whom you have no sympathy—whom I do not believe you truly love;for I have seen and heard you sneer at her. I would scorn such a union:therefore I am better than you—let me go!”“Where, Jane? To Ireland?”“Yes—to Ireland. I have spoken my mind, and can go anywhere now.”“Jane, be still; don’t struggle so, like a wild frantic bird that isrending its own plumage in its desperation.”“I am no bird; and no net ensnares me; I am a free human being with anindependent will, which I now exert to leave you.”Another effort set me at liberty, and I stood erect before him.“And your will shall decide your destiny,” he said: “I offer you myhand, my heart, and a share of all my possessions.”“You play a farce, which I merely laugh at.”“I ask you to pass through life at my side—to be my second self, andbest earthly companion.”“For that fate you have already made your choice, and must abide byit.”“Jane, be still a few moments: you are over-excited: I will be stilltoo.”A waft of wind came sweeping down the laurel-walk, and trembled throughthe boughs of the chestnut: it wandered away—away—to an indefinitedistance—it died. The nightingale’s song was then the only voice of thehour: in listening to it, I again wept. Mr. Rochester sat quiet,looking at me gently and seriously. Some time passed before he spoke;he at last said—“Come to my side, Jane, and let us explain and understand one another.”“I will never again come to your side: I am torn away now, and cannotreturn.”“But, Jane, I summon you as my wife: it is you only I intend to marry.”I was silent: I thought he mocked me.“Come, Jane—come hither.”“Your bride stands between us.”He rose, and with a stride reached me.“My bride is here,” he said, again drawing me to him, “because my equalis here, and my likeness. Jane, will you marry me?”Still I did not answer, and still I writhed myself from his grasp: forI was still incredulous.“Do you doubt me, Jane?”“Entirely.”“You have no faith in me?”“Not a whit.”“Am I a liar in your eyes?” he asked passionately. “Little sceptic, you_shall_ be convinced. What love have I for Miss Ingram? None: and thatyou know. What love has she for me? None: as I have taken pains toprove: I caused a rumour to reach her that my fortune was not a thirdof what was supposed, and after that I presented myself to see theresult; it was coldness both from her and her mother. I would not—Icould not—marry Miss Ingram. You—you strange, you almost unearthlything!—I love as my own flesh. You—poor and obscure, and small andplain as you are—I entreat to accept me as a husband.”“What, me!” I ejaculated, beginning in his earnestness—and especiallyin his incivility—to credit his sincerity: “me who have not a friend inthe world but you—if you are my friend: not a shilling but what youhave given me?”“You, Jane, I must have you for my own—entirely my own. Will you bemine? Say yes, quickly.”“Mr. Rochester, let me look at your face: turn to the moonlight.”“Why?”“Because I want to read your countenance—turn!”“There! you will find it scarcely more legible than a crumpled,scratched page. Read on: only make haste, for I suffer.”His face was very much agitated and very much flushed, and there werestrong workings in the features, and strange gleams in the eyes.“Oh, Jane, you torture me!” he exclaimed. “With that searching and yetfaithful and generous look, you torture me!”“How can I do that? If you are true, and your offer real, my onlyfeelings to you must be gratitude and devotion—they cannot torture.”“Gratitude!” he ejaculated; and added wildly—“Jane accept me quickly.Say, Edward—give me my name—Edward—I will marry you.”“Are you in earnest? Do you truly love me? Do you sincerely wish me tobe your wife?”“I do; and if an oath is necessary to satisfy you, I swear it.”“Then, sir, I will marry you.”“Edward—my little wife!”“Dear Edward!”“Come to me—come to me entirely now,” said he; and added, in hisdeepest tone, speaking in my ear as his cheek was laid on mine, “Makemy happiness—I will make yours.”“God pardon me!” he subjoined ere long; “and man meddle not with me: Ihave her, and will hold her.”“There is no one to meddle, sir. I have no kindred to interfere.”“No—that is the best of it,” he said. And if I had loved him less Ishould have thought his accent and look of exultation savage; but,sitting by him, roused from the nightmare of parting—called to theparadise of union—I thought only of the bliss given me to drink in soabundant a flow. Again and again he said, “Are you happy, Jane?” Andagain and again I answered, “Yes.” After which he murmured, “It willatone—it will atone. Have I not found her friendless, and cold, andcomfortless? Will I not guard, and cherish, and solace her? Is therenot love in my heart, and constancy in my resolves? It will expiate atGod’s tribunal. I know my Maker sanctions what I do. For the world’sjudgment—I wash my hands thereof. For man’s opinion—I defy it.”But what had befallen the night? The moon was not yet set, and we wereall in shadow: I could scarcely see my master’s face, near as I was.And what ailed the chestnut tree? it writhed and groaned; while windroared in the laurel walk, and came sweeping over us.“We must go in,” said Mr. Rochester: “the weather changes. I could havesat with thee till morning, Jane.”“And so,” thought I, “could I with you.” I should have said so,perhaps, but a livid, vivid spark leapt out of a cloud at which I waslooking, and there was a crack, a crash, and a close rattling peal; andI thought only of hiding my dazzled eyes against Mr. Rochester’sshoulder.The rain rushed down. He hurried me up the walk, through the grounds,and into the house; but we were quite wet before we could pass thethreshold. He was taking off my shawl in the hall, and shaking thewater out of my loosened hair, when Mrs. Fairfax emerged from her room.I did not observe her at first, nor did Mr. Rochester. The lamp waslit. The clock was on the stroke of twelve.“Hasten to take off your wet things,” said he; “and before you go,good-night—good-night, my darling!”He kissed me repeatedly. When I looked up, on leaving his arms, therestood the widow, pale, grave, and amazed. I only smiled at her, and ranupstairs. “Explanation will do for another time,” thought I. Still,when I reached my chamber, I felt a pang at the idea she should eventemporarily misconstrue what she had seen. But joy soon effaced everyother feeling; and loud as the wind blew, near and deep as the thundercrashed, fierce and frequent as the lightning gleamed, cataract-like asthe rain fell during a storm of two hours’ duration, I experienced nofear and little awe. Mr. Rochester came thrice to my door in the courseof it, to ask if I was safe and tranquil: and that was comfort, thatwas strength for anything.Before I left my bed in the morning, little Adèle came running in totell me that the great horse-chestnut at the bottom of the orchard hadbeen struck by lightning in the night, and half of it split away.CHAPTER XXIVAs I rose and dressed, I thought over what had happened, and wonderedif it were a dream. I could not be certain of the reality till I hadseen Mr. Rochester again, and heard him renew his words of love andpromise.While arranging my hair, I looked at my face in the glass, and felt itwas no longer plain: there was hope in its aspect and life in itscolour; and my eyes seemed as if they had beheld the fount of fruition,and borrowed beams from the lustrous ripple. I had often been unwillingto look at my master, because I feared he could not be pleased at mylook; but I was sure I might lift my face to his now, and not cool hisaffection by its expression. I took a plain but clean and light summerdress from my drawer and put it on: it seemed no attire had ever sowell become me, because none had I ever worn in so blissful a mood.I was not surprised, when I ran down into the hall, to see that abrilliant June morning had succeeded to the tempest of the night; andto feel, through the open glass door, the breathing of a fresh andfragrant breeze. Nature must be gladsome when I was so happy. Abeggar-woman and her little boy—pale, ragged objects both—were comingup the walk, and I ran down and gave them all the money I happened tohave in my purse—some three or four shillings: good or bad, they mustpartake of my jubilee. The rooks cawed, and blither birds sang; butnothing was so merry or so musical as my own rejoicing heart.Mrs. Fairfax surprised me by looking out of the window with a sadcountenance, and saying gravely—“Miss Eyre, will you come tobreakfast?” During the meal she was quiet and cool: but I could notundeceive her then. I must wait for my master to give explanations; andso must she. I ate what I could, and then I hastened upstairs. I metAdèle leaving the schoolroom.“Where are you going? It is time for lessons.”“Mr. Rochester has sent me away to the nursery.”“Where is he?”“In there,” pointing to the apartment she had left; and I went in, andthere he stood.“Come and bid me good-morning,” said he. I gladly advanced; and it wasnot merely a cold word now, or even a shake of the hand that Ireceived, but an embrace and a kiss. It seemed natural: it seemedgenial to be so well loved, so caressed by him.“Jane, you look blooming, and smiling, and pretty,” said he: “trulypretty this morning. Is this my pale, little elf? Is this mymustard-seed? This little sunny-faced girl with the dimpled cheek androsy lips; the satin-smooth hazel hair, and the radiant hazel eyes?” (Ihad green eyes, reader; but you must excuse the mistake: for him theywere new-dyed, I suppose.)“It is Jane Eyre, sir.”“Soon to be Jane Rochester,” he added: “in four weeks, Janet; not a daymore. Do you hear that?”I did, and I could not quite comprehend it: it made me giddy. Thefeeling, the announcement sent through me, was something stronger thanwas consistent with joy—something that smote and stunned: it was, Ithink almost fear.“You blushed, and now you are white, Jane: what is that for?”“Because you gave me a new name—Jane Rochester; and it seems sostrange.”“Yes, Mrs. Rochester,” said he; “young Mrs. Rochester—FairfaxRochester’s girl-bride.”“It can never be, sir; it does not sound likely. Human beings neverenjoy complete happiness in this world. I was not born for a differentdestiny to the rest of my species: to imagine such a lot befalling meis a fairy tale—a day-dream.”“Which I can and will realise. I shall begin to-day. This morning Iwrote to my banker in London to send me certain jewels he has in hiskeeping,—heirlooms for the ladies of Thornfield. In a day or two I hopeto pour them into your lap: for every privilege, every attention shallbe yours that I would accord a peer’s daughter, if about to marry her.”“Oh, sir!—never rain jewels! I don’t like to hear them spoken of.Jewels for Jane Eyre sounds unnatural and strange: I would rather nothave them.”“I will myself put the diamond chain round your neck, and the circleton your forehead,—which it will become: for nature, at least, hasstamped her patent of nobility on this brow, Jane; and I will clasp thebracelets on these fine wrists, and load these fairy-like fingers withrings.”“No, no, sir! think of other subjects, and speak of other things, andin another strain. Don’t address me as if I were a beauty; I am yourplain, Quakerish governess.”“You are a beauty in my eyes, and a beauty just after the desire of myheart,—delicate and aërial.”“Puny and insignificant, you mean. You are dreaming, sir,—or you aresneering. For God’s sake, don’t be ironical!”“I will make the world acknowledge you a beauty, too,” he went on,while I really became uneasy at the strain he had adopted, because Ifelt he was either deluding himself or trying to delude me. “I willattire my Jane in satin and lace, and she shall have roses in her hair;and I will cover the head I love best with a priceless veil.”“And then you won’t know me, sir; and I shall not be your Jane Eyre anylonger, but an ape in a harlequin’s jacket—a jay in borrowed plumes. Iwould as soon see you, Mr. Rochester, tricked out in stage-trappings,as myself clad in a court-lady’s robe; and I don’t call you handsome,sir, though I love you most dearly: far too dearly to flatter you.Don’t flatter me.”He pursued his theme, however, without noticing my deprecation. “Thisvery day I shall take you in the carriage to Millcote, and you mustchoose some dresses for yourself. I told you we shall be married infour weeks. The wedding is to take place quietly, in the church downbelow yonder; and then I shall waft you away at once to town. After abrief stay there, I shall bear my treasure to regions nearer the sun:to French vineyards and Italian plains; and she shall see whatever isfamous in old story and in modern record: she shall taste, too, of thelife of cities; and she shall learn to value herself by just comparisonwith others.”“Shall I travel?—and with you, sir?”“You shall sojourn at Paris, Rome, and Naples: at Florence, Venice, andVienna: all the ground I have wandered over shall be re-trodden by you:wherever I stamped my hoof, your sylph’s foot shall step also. Tenyears since, I flew through Europe half mad; with disgust, hate, andrage as my companions: now I shall revisit it healed and cleansed, witha very angel as my comforter.”I laughed at him as he said this. “I am not an angel,” I asserted; “andI will not be one till I die: I will be myself. Mr. Rochester, you mustneither expect nor exact anything celestial of me—for you will not getit, any more than I shall get it of you: which I do not at allanticipate.”“What do you anticipate of me?”“For a little while you will perhaps be as you are now,—a very littlewhile; and then you will turn cool; and then you will be capricious;and then you will be stern, and I shall have much ado to please you:but when you get well used to me, you will perhaps like meagain,—_like_ me, I say, not _love_ me. I suppose your love willeffervesce in six months, or less. I have observed in books written bymen, that period assigned as the farthest to which a husband’s ardourextends. Yet, after all, as a friend and companion, I hope never tobecome quite distasteful to my dear master.”“Distasteful! and like you again! I think I shall like you again, andyet again: and I will make you confess I do not only _like_, but _love_you—with truth, fervour, constancy.”“Yet are you not capricious, sir?”“To women who please me only by their faces, I am the very devil when Ifind out they have neither souls nor hearts—when they open to me aperspective of flatness, triviality, and perhaps imbecility,coarseness, and ill-temper: but to the clear eye and eloquent tongue,to the soul made of fire, and the character that bends but does notbreak—at once supple and stable, tractable and consistent—I am evertender and true.”“Had you ever experience of such a character, sir? Did you ever lovesuch an one?”“I love it now.”“But before me: if I, indeed, in any respect come up to your difficultstandard?”“I never met your likeness. Jane, you please me, and you master me—youseem to submit, and I like the sense of pliancy you impart; and while Iam twining the soft, silken skein round my finger, it sends a thrill upmy arm to my heart. I am influenced—conquered; and the influence issweeter than I can express; and the conquest I undergo has a witcherybeyond any triumph I can win. Why do you smile, Jane? What does thatinexplicable, that uncanny turn of countenance mean?”“I was thinking, sir (you will excuse the idea; it was involuntary), Iwas thinking of Hercules and Samson with their charmers—”“You were, you little elfish—”“Hush, sir! You don’t talk very wisely just now; any more than thosegentlemen acted very wisely. However, had they been married, they wouldno doubt by their severity as husbands have made up for their softnessas suitors; and so will you, I fear. I wonder how you will answer me ayear hence, should I ask a favour it does not suit your convenience orpleasure to grant.”“Ask me something now, Janet,—the least thing: I desire to beentreated—”“Indeed I will, sir; I have my petition all ready.”“Speak! But if you look up and smile with that countenance, I shallswear concession before I know to what, and that will make a fool ofme.”“Not at all, sir; I ask only this: don’t send for the jewels, and don’tcrown me with roses: you might as well put a border of gold lace roundthat plain pocket handkerchief you have there.”“I might as well ‘gild refined gold.’ I know it: your request isgranted then—for the time. I will remand the order I despatched to mybanker. But you have not yet asked for anything; you have prayed a giftto be withdrawn: try again.”“Well then, sir, have the goodness to gratify my curiosity, which ismuch piqued on one point.”He looked disturbed. “What? what?” he said hastily. “Curiosity is adangerous petition: it is well I have not taken a vow to accord everyrequest—”“But there can be no danger in complying with this, sir.”“Utter it, Jane: but I wish that instead of a mere inquiry into,perhaps, a secret, it was a wish for half my estate.”“Now, King Ahasuerus! What do I want with half your estate? Do youthink I am a Jew-usurer, seeking good investment in land? I would muchrather have all your confidence. You will not exclude me from yourconfidence if you admit me to your heart?”“You are welcome to all my confidence that is worth having, Jane; butfor God’s sake, don’t desire a useless burden! Don’t long forpoison—don’t turn out a downright Eve on my hands!”“Why not, sir? You have just been telling me how much you liked to beconquered, and how pleasant over-persuasion is to you. Don’t you thinkI had better take advantage of the confession, and begin and coax andentreat—even cry and be sulky if necessary—for the sake of a mere essayof my power?”“I dare you to any such experiment. Encroach, presume, and the game isup.”“Is it, sir? You soon give in. How stern you look now! Your eyebrowshave become as thick as my finger, and your forehead resembles what, insome very astonishing poetry, I once saw styled, ‘a blue-piledthunderloft.’ That will be your married look, sir, I suppose?”“If that will be _your_ married look, I, as a Christian, will soon giveup the notion of consorting with a mere sprite or salamander. But whathad you to ask, thing,—out with it?”“There, you are less than civil now; and I like rudeness a great dealbetter than flattery. I had rather be a _thing_ than an angel. This iswhat I have to ask,—Why did you take such pains to make me believe youwished to marry Miss Ingram?”“Is that all? Thank God it is no worse!” And now he unknit his blackbrows; looked down, smiling at me, and stroked my hair, as if wellpleased at seeing a danger averted. “I think I may confess,” hecontinued, “even although I should make you a little indignant,Jane—and I have seen what a fire-spirit you can be when you areindignant. You glowed in the cool moonlight last night, when youmutinied against fate, and claimed your rank as my equal. Janet,by-the-bye, it was you who made me the offer.”“Of course I did. But to the point if you please, sir—Miss Ingram?”“Well, I feigned courtship of Miss Ingram, because I wished to renderyou as madly in love with me as I was with you; and I knew jealousywould be the best ally I could call in for the furtherance of thatend.”“Excellent! Now you are small—not one whit bigger than the end of mylittle finger. It was a burning shame and a scandalous disgrace to actin that way. Did you think nothing of Miss Ingram’s feelings, sir?”“Her feelings are concentrated in one—pride; and that needs humbling.Were you jealous, Jane?”“Never mind, Mr. Rochester: it is in no way interesting to you to knowthat. Answer me truly once more. Do you think Miss Ingram will notsuffer from your dishonest coquetry? Won’t she feel forsaken anddeserted?”“Impossible!—when I told you how she, on the contrary, deserted me: theidea of my insolvency cooled, or rather extinguished, her flame in amoment.”“You have a curious, designing mind, Mr. Rochester. I am afraid yourprinciples on some points are eccentric.”“My principles were never trained, Jane: they may have grown a littleawry for want of attention.”“Once again, seriously; may I enjoy the great good that has beenvouchsafed to me, without fearing that any one else is suffering thebitter pain I myself felt a while ago?”“That you may, my good little girl: there is not another being in theworld has the same pure love for me as yourself—for I lay that pleasantunction to my soul, Jane, a belief in your affection.”I turned my lips to the hand that lay on my shoulder. I loved him verymuch—more than I could trust myself to say—more than words had power toexpress.“Ask something more,” he said presently; “it is my delight to beentreated, and to yield.”I was again ready with my request. “Communicate your intentions to Mrs.Fairfax, sir: she saw me with you last night in the hall, and she wasshocked. Give her some explanation before I see her again. It pains meto be misjudged by so good a woman.”“Go to your room, and put on your bonnet,” he replied. “I mean you toaccompany me to Millcote this morning; and while you prepare for thedrive, I will enlighten the old lady’s understanding. Did she think,Janet, you had given the world for love, and considered it well lost?”“I believe she thought I had forgotten my station, and yours, sir.”“Station! station!—your station is in my heart, and on the necks ofthose who would insult you, now or hereafter.—Go.”I was soon dressed; and when I heard Mr. Rochester quit Mrs. Fairfax’sparlour, I hurried down to it. The old lady had been reading hermorning portion of Scripture—the Lesson for the day; her Bible lay openbefore her, and her spectacles were upon it. Her occupation, suspendedby Mr. Rochester’s announcement, seemed now forgotten: her eyes, fixedon the blank wall opposite, expressed the surprise of a quiet mindstirred by unwonted tidings. Seeing me, she roused herself: she made asort of effort to smile, and framed a few words of congratulation; butthe smile expired, and the sentence was abandoned unfinished. She putup her spectacles, shut the Bible, and pushed her chair back from thetable.“I feel so astonished,” she began, “I hardly know what to say to you,Miss Eyre. I have surely not been dreaming, have I? Sometimes I halffall asleep when I am sitting alone and fancy things that have neverhappened. It has seemed to me more than once when I have been in adoze, that my dear husband, who died fifteen years since, has come inand sat down beside me; and that I have even heard him call me by myname, Alice, as he used to do. Now, can you tell me whether it isactually true that Mr. Rochester has asked you to marry him? Don’tlaugh at me. But I really thought he came in here five minutes ago, andsaid that in a month you would be his wife.”“He has said the same thing to me,” I replied.“He has! Do you believe him? Have you accepted him?”“Yes.”She looked at me bewildered.“I could never have thought it. He is a proud man: all the Rochesterswere proud: and his father, at least, liked money. He, too, has alwaysbeen called careful. He means to marry you?”“He tells me so.”She surveyed my whole person: in her eyes I read that they had therefound no charm powerful enough to solve the enigma.“It passes me!” she continued; “but no doubt it is true since you sayso. How it will answer, I cannot tell: I really don’t know. Equality ofposition and fortune is often advisable in such cases; and there aretwenty years of difference in your ages. He might almost be yourfather.”“No, indeed, Mrs. Fairfax!” exclaimed I, nettled; “he is nothing likemy father! No one, who saw us together, would suppose it for aninstant. Mr. Rochester looks as young, and is as young, as some men atfive-and-twenty.”“Is it really for love he is going to marry you?” she asked.I was so hurt by her coldness and scepticism, that the tears rose to myeyes.“I am sorry to grieve you,” pursued the widow; “but you are so young,and so little acquainted with men, I wished to put you on your guard.It is an old saying that ‘all is not gold that glitters;’ and in thiscase I do fear there will be something found to be different to whateither you or I expect.”“Why?—am I a monster?” I said: “is it impossible that Mr. Rochestershould have a sincere affection for me?”“No: you are very well; and much improved of late; and Mr. Rochester, Idaresay, is fond of you. I have always noticed that you were a sort ofpet of his. There are times when, for your sake, I have been a littleuneasy at his marked preference, and have wished to put you on yourguard: but I did not like to suggest even the possibility of wrong. Iknew such an idea would shock, perhaps offend you; and you were sodiscreet, and so thoroughly modest and sensible, I hoped you might betrusted to protect yourself. Last night I cannot tell you what Isuffered when I sought all over the house, and could find you nowhere,nor the master either; and then, at twelve o’clock, saw you come inwith him.”“Well, never mind that now,” I interrupted impatiently; “it is enoughthat all was right.”“I hope all will be right in the end,” she said: “but believe me, youcannot be too careful. Try and keep Mr. Rochester at a distance:distrust yourself as well as him. Gentlemen in his station are notaccustomed to marry their governesses.”I was growing truly irritated: happily, Adèle ran in.“Let me go,—let me go to Millcote too!” she cried. “Mr. Rochesterwon’t: though there is so much room in the new carriage. Beg him to letme go, mademoiselle.”“That I will, Adèle;” and I hastened away with her, glad to quit mygloomy monitress. The carriage was ready: they were bringing it roundto the front, and my master was pacing the pavement, Pilot followinghim backwards and forwards.“Adèle may accompany us, may she not, sir?”“I told her no. I’ll have no brats!—I’ll have only you.”“Do let her go, Mr. Rochester, if you please: it would be better.”“Not it: she will be a restraint.”He was quite peremptory, both in look and voice. The chill of Mrs.Fairfax’s warnings, and the damp of her doubts were upon me: somethingof unsubstantiality and uncertainty had beset my hopes. I half lost thesense of power over him. I was about mechanically to obey him, withoutfurther remonstrance; but as he helped me into the carriage, he lookedat my face.“What is the matter?” he asked; “all the sunshine is gone. Do youreally wish the bairn to go? Will it annoy you if she is left behind?”“I would far rather she went, sir.”“Then off for your bonnet, and back like a flash of lightning!” criedhe to Adèle.She obeyed him with what speed she might.“After all, a single morning’s interruption will not matter much,” saidhe, “when I mean shortly to claim you—your thoughts, conversation, andcompany—for life.”Adèle, when lifted in, commenced kissing me, by way of expressing hergratitude for my intercession: she was instantly stowed away into acorner on the other side of him. She then peeped round to where I sat;so stern a neighbour was too restrictive: to him, in his presentfractious mood, she dared whisper no observations, nor ask of him anyinformation.“Let her come to me,” I entreated: “she will, perhaps, trouble you,sir: there is plenty of room on this side.”He handed her over as if she had been a lapdog. “I’ll send her toschool yet,” he said, but now he was smiling.Adèle heard him, and asked if she was to go to school “sansmademoiselle?”“Yes,” he replied, “absolutely sans mademoiselle; for I am to takemademoiselle to the moon, and there I shall seek a cave in one of thewhite valleys among the volcano-tops, and mademoiselle shall live withme there, and only me.”“She will have nothing to eat: you will starve her,” observed Adèle.“I shall gather manna for her morning and night: the plains andhillsides in the moon are bleached with manna, Adèle.”“She will want to warm herself: what will she do for a fire?”“Fire rises out of the lunar mountains: when she is cold, I’ll carryher up to a peak, and lay her down on the edge of a crater.”“Oh, qu’elle y sera mal—peu comfortable! And her clothes, they willwear out: how can she get new ones?”Mr. Rochester professed to be puzzled. “Hem!” said he. “What would youdo, Adèle? Cudgel your brains for an expedient. How would a white or apink cloud answer for a gown, do you think? And one could cut a prettyenough scarf out of a rainbow.”“She is far better as she is,” concluded Adèle, after musing some time:“besides, she would get tired of living with only you in the moon. If Iwere mademoiselle, I would never consent to go with you.”“She has consented: she has pledged her word.”“But you can’t get her there; there is no road to the moon: it is allair; and neither you nor she can fly.”“Adèle, look at that field.” We were now outside Thornfield gates, andbowling lightly along the smooth road to Millcote, where the dust waswell laid by the thunderstorm, and, where the low hedges and loftytimber trees on each side glistened green and rain-refreshed.“In that field, Adèle, I was walking late one evening about a fortnightsince—the evening of the day you helped me to make hay in the orchardmeadows; and, as I was tired with raking swaths, I sat down to rest meon a stile; and there I took out a little book and a pencil, and beganto write about a misfortune that befell me long ago, and a wish I hadfor happy days to come: I was writing away very fast, though daylightwas fading from the leaf, when something came up the path and stoppedtwo yards off me. I looked at it. It was a little thing with a veil ofgossamer on its head. I beckoned it to come near me; it stood soon atmy knee. I never spoke to it, and it never spoke to me, in words; but Iread its eyes, and it read mine; and our speechless colloquy was tothis effect—“It was a fairy, and come from Elf-land, it said; and its errand was tomake me happy: I must go with it out of the common world to a lonelyplace—such as the moon, for instance—and it nodded its head towards herhorn, rising over Hay-hill: it told me of the alabaster cave and silvervale where we might live. I said I should like to go; but reminded it,as you did me, that I had no wings to fly.“‘Oh,’ returned the fairy, ‘that does not signify! Here is a talismanwill remove all difficulties;’ and she held out a pretty gold ring.‘Put it,’ she said, ‘on the fourth finger of my left hand, and I amyours, and you are mine; and we shall leave earth, and make our ownheaven yonder.’ She nodded again at the moon. The ring, Adèle, is in mybreeches-pocket, under the disguise of a sovereign: but I mean soon tochange it to a ring again.”“But what has mademoiselle to do with it? I don’t care for the fairy:you said it was mademoiselle you would take to the moon?”“Mademoiselle is a fairy,” he said, whispering mysteriously. WhereuponI told her not to mind his badinage; and she, on her part, evinced afund of genuine French scepticism: denominating Mr. Rochester “un vraimenteur,” and assuring him that she made no account whatever of his“contes de fée,” and that “du reste, il n’y avait pas de fées, et quandmême il y en avait:” she was sure they would never appear to him, norever give him rings, or offer to live with him in the moon.The hour spent at Millcote was a somewhat harassing one to me. Mr.Rochester obliged me to go to a certain silk warehouse: there I wasordered to choose half-a-dozen dresses. I hated the business, I beggedleave to defer it: no—it should be gone through with now. By dint ofentreaties expressed in energetic whispers, I reduced the half-dozen totwo: these however, he vowed he would select himself. With anxiety Iwatched his eye rove over the gay stores: he fixed on a rich silk ofthe most brilliant amethyst dye, and a superb pink satin. I told him ina new series of whispers, that he might as well buy me a gold gown anda silver bonnet at once: I should certainly never venture to wear hischoice. With infinite difficulty, for he was stubborn as a stone, Ipersuaded him to make an exchange in favour of a sober black satin andpearl-grey silk. “It might pass for the present,” he said; “but hewould yet see me glittering like a parterre.”Glad was I to get him out of the silk warehouse, and then out of ajeweller’s shop: the more he bought me, the more my cheek burned with asense of annoyance and degradation. As we re-entered the carriage, andI sat back feverish and fagged, I remembered what, in the hurry ofevents, dark and bright, I had wholly forgotten—the letter of my uncle,John Eyre, to Mrs. Reed: his intention to adopt me and make me hislegatee. “It would, indeed, be a relief,” I thought, “if I had ever sosmall an independency; I never can bear being dressed like a doll byMr. Rochester, or sitting like a second Danae with the golden showerfalling daily round me. I will write to Madeira the moment I get home,and tell my uncle John I am going to be married, and to whom: if I hadbut a prospect of one day bringing Mr. Rochester an accession offortune, I could better endure to be kept by him now.” And somewhatrelieved by this idea (which I failed not to execute that day), Iventured once more to meet my master’s and lover’s eye, which mostpertinaciously sought mine, though I averted both face and gaze. Hesmiled; and I thought his smile was such as a sultan might, in ablissful and fond moment, bestow on a slave his gold and gems hadenriched: I crushed his hand, which was ever hunting mine, vigorously,and thrust it back to him red with the passionate pressure.“You need not look in that way,” I said; “if you do, I’ll wear nothingbut my old Lowood frocks to the end of the chapter. I’ll be married inthis lilac gingham: you may make a dressing-gown for yourself out ofthe pearl-grey silk, and an infinite series of waistcoats out of theblack satin.”He chuckled; he rubbed his hands. “Oh, it is rich to see and hear her!”he exclaimed. “Is she original? Is she piquant? I would not exchangethis one little English girl for the Grand Turk’s whole seraglio,gazelle-eyes, houri forms, and all!”The Eastern allusion bit me again. “I’ll not stand you an inch in thestead of a seraglio,” I said; “so don’t consider me an equivalent forone. If you have a fancy for anything in that line, away with you, sir,to the bazaars of Stamboul without delay, and lay out in extensiveslave-purchases some of that spare cash you seem at a loss to spendsatisfactorily here.”“And what will you do, Janet, while I am bargaining for so many tons offlesh and such an assortment of black eyes?”“I’ll be preparing myself to go out as a missionary to preach libertyto them that are enslaved—your harem inmates amongst the rest. I’ll getadmitted there, and I’ll stir up mutiny; and you, three-tailed bashawas you are, sir, shall in a trice find yourself fettered amongst ourhands: nor will I, for one, consent to cut your bonds till you havesigned a charter, the most liberal that despot ever yet conferred.”“I would consent to be at your mercy, Jane.”“I would have no mercy, Mr. Rochester, if you supplicated for it withan eye like that. While you looked so, I should be certain thatwhatever charter you might grant under coercion, your first act, whenreleased, would be to violate its conditions.”“Why, Jane, what would you have? I fear you will compel me to gothrough a private marriage ceremony, besides that performed at thealtar. You will stipulate, I see, for peculiar terms—what will theybe?”“I only want an easy mind, sir; not crushed by crowded obligations. Doyou remember what you said of Céline Varens?—of the diamonds, thecashmeres you gave her? I will not be your English Céline Varens. Ishall continue to act as Adèle’s governess; by that I shall earn myboard and lodging, and thirty pounds a year besides. I’ll furnish myown wardrobe out of that money, and you shall give me nothing but—”“Well, but what?”“Your regard; and if I give you mine in return, that debt will bequit.”“Well, for cool native impudence and pure innate pride, you haven’tyour equal,” said he. We were now approaching Thornfield. “Will itplease you to dine with me to-day?” he asked, as we re-entered thegates.“No, thank you, sir.”“And what for, ‘no, thank you?’ if one may inquire.”“I never have dined with you, sir: and I see no reason why I shouldnow: till—”“Till what? You delight in half-phrases.”“Till I can’t help it.”“Do you suppose I eat like an ogre or a ghoul, that you dread being thecompanion of my repast?”“I have formed no supposition on the subject, sir; but I want to go onas usual for another month.”“You will give up your governessing slavery at once.”“Indeed, begging your pardon, sir, I shall not. I shall just go on withit as usual. I shall keep out of your way all day, as I have beenaccustomed to do: you may send for me in the evening, when you feeldisposed to see me, and I’ll come then; but at no other time.”“I want a smoke, Jane, or a pinch of snuff, to comfort me under allthis, ‘pour me donner une contenance,’ as Adèle would say; andunfortunately I have neither my cigar-case, nor my snuff-box. Butlisten—whisper. It is your time now, little tyrant, but it will be minepresently; and when once I have fairly seized you, to have and to hold,I’ll just—figuratively speaking—attach you to a chain like this”(touching his watch-guard). “Yes, bonny wee thing, I’ll wear you in mybosom, lest my jewel I should tyne.”He said this as he helped me to alight from the carriage, and while heafterwards lifted out Adèle, I entered the house, and made good myretreat upstairs.He duly summoned me to his presence in the evening. I had prepared anoccupation for him; for I was determined not to spend the whole time ina _tête-à-tête_ conversation. I remembered his fine voice; I knew heliked to sing—good singers generally do. I was no vocalist myself, and,in his fastidious judgment, no musician, either; but I delighted inlistening when the performance was good. No sooner had twilight, thathour of romance, began to lower her blue and starry banner over thelattice, than I rose, opened the piano, and entreated him, for the loveof heaven, to give me a song. He said I was a capricious witch, andthat he would rather sing another time; but I averred that no time waslike the present.“Did I like his voice?” he asked.“Very much.” I was not fond of pampering that susceptible vanity ofhis; but for once, and from motives of expediency, I would e’en sootheand stimulate it.“Then, Jane, you must play the accompaniment.”“Very well, sir, I will try.”I did try, but was presently swept off the stool and denominated “alittle bungler.” Being pushed unceremoniously to one side—which wasprecisely what I wished—he usurped my place, and proceeded to accompanyhimself: for he could play as well as sing. I hied me to thewindow-recess. And while I sat there and looked out on the still treesand dim lawn, to a sweet air was sung in mellow tones the followingstrain:—“The truest love that ever heartFelt at its kindled core,Did through each vein, in quickened start,The tide of being pour.Her coming was my hope each day,Her parting was my pain;The chance that did her steps delayWas ice in every vein.I dreamed it would be nameless bliss,As I loved, loved to be;And to this object did I pressAs blind as eagerly.But wide as pathless was the spaceThat lay our lives between,And dangerous as the foamy raceOf ocean-surges green.And haunted as a robber-pathThrough wilderness or wood;For Might and Right, and Woe and Wrath,Between our spirits stood.I dangers dared; I hindrance scorned;I omens did defy:Whatever menaced, harassed, warned,I passed impetuous by.On sped my rainbow, fast as light;I flew as in a dream;For glorious rose upon my sightThat child of Shower and Gleam.Still bright on clouds of suffering dimShines that soft, solemn joy;Nor care I now, how dense and grimDisasters gather nigh.I care not in this moment sweet,Though all I have rushed o’erShould come on pinion, strong and fleet,Proclaiming vengeance sore:Though haughty Hate should strike me down,Right, bar approach to me,And grinding Might, with furious frown,Swear endless enmity.My love has placed her little handWith noble faith in mine,And vowed that wedlock’s sacred bandOur nature shall entwine.My love has sworn, with sealing kiss,With me to live—to die;I have at last my nameless bliss.As I love—loved am I!”He rose and came towards me, and I saw his face all kindled, and hisfull falcon-eye flashing, and tenderness and passion in everylineament. I quailed momentarily—then I rallied. Soft scene, daringdemonstration, I would not have; and I stood in peril of both: a weaponof defence must be prepared—I whetted my tongue: as he reached me, Iasked with asperity, “whom he was going to marry now?”“That was a strange question to be put by his darling Jane.”“Indeed! I considered it a very natural and necessary one: he hadtalked of his future wife dying with him. What did he mean by such apagan idea? _I_ had no intention of dying with him—he might depend onthat.”“Oh, all he longed, all he prayed for, was that I might live with him!Death was not for such as I.”“Indeed it was: I had as good a right to die when my time came as hehad: but I should bide that time, and not be hurried away in a suttee.”“Would I forgive him for the selfish idea, and prove my pardon by areconciling kiss?”“No: I would rather be excused.”Here I heard myself apostrophised as a “hard little thing;” and it wasadded, “any other woman would have been melted to marrow at hearingsuch stanzas crooned in her praise.”I assured him I was naturally hard—very flinty, and that he would oftenfind me so; and that, moreover, I was determined to show him diversrugged points in my character before the ensuing four weeks elapsed: heshould know fully what sort of a bargain he had made, while there wasyet time to rescind it.“Would I be quiet and talk rationally?”“I would be quiet if he liked, and as to talking rationally, Iflattered myself I was doing that now.”He fretted, pished, and pshawed. “Very good,” I thought; “you may fumeand fidget as you please: but this is the best plan to pursue with you,I am certain. I like you more than I can say; but I’ll not sink into abathos of sentiment: and with this needle of repartee I’ll keep youfrom the edge of the gulf too; and, moreover, maintain by its pungentaid that distance between you and myself most conducive to our realmutual advantage.”From less to more, I worked him up to considerable irritation; then,after he had retired, in dudgeon, quite to the other end of the room, Igot up, and saying, “I wish you good-night, sir,” in my natural andwonted respectful manner, I slipped out by the side-door and got away.The system thus entered on, I pursued during the whole season ofprobation; and with the best success. He was kept, to be sure, rathercross and crusty; but on the whole I could see he was excellentlyentertained, and that a lamb-like submission and turtle-dovesensibility, while fostering his despotism more, would have pleased hisjudgment, satisfied his common-sense, and even suited his taste less.In other people’s presence I was, as formerly, deferential and quiet;any other line of conduct being uncalled for: it was only in theevening conferences I thus thwarted and afflicted him. He continued tosend for me punctually the moment the clock struck seven; though when Iappeared before him now, he had no such honeyed terms as “love” and“darling” on his lips: the best words at my service were “provokingpuppet,” “malicious elf,” “sprite,” “changeling,” &c. For caresses,too, I now got grimaces; for a pressure of the hand, a pinch on thearm; for a kiss on the cheek, a severe tweak of the ear. It was allright: at present I decidedly preferred these fierce favours toanything more tender. Mrs. Fairfax, I saw, approved me: her anxiety onmy account vanished; therefore I was certain I did well. Meantime, Mr.Rochester affirmed I was wearing him to skin and bone, and threatenedawful vengeance for my present conduct at some period fast coming. Ilaughed in my sleeve at his menaces. “I can keep you in reasonablecheck now,” I reflected; “and I don’t doubt to be able to do ithereafter: if one expedient loses its virtue, another must be devised.”Yet after all my task was not an easy one; often I would rather havepleased than teased him. My future husband was becoming to me my wholeworld; and more than the world: almost my hope of heaven. He stoodbetween me and every thought of religion, as an eclipse intervenesbetween man and the broad sun. I could not, in those days, see God forHis creature: of whom I had made an idol.CHAPTER XXVThe month of courtship had wasted: its very last hours were beingnumbered. There was no putting off the day that advanced—the bridalday; and all preparations for its arrival were complete. _I_, at least,had nothing more to do: there were my trunks, packed, locked, corded,ranged in a row along the wall of my little chamber; to-morrow, at thistime, they would be far on their road to London: and so should I(D.V.),—or rather, not I, but one Jane Rochester, a person whom as yetI knew not. The cards of address alone remained to nail on: they lay,four little squares, in the drawer. Mr. Rochester had himself writtenthe direction, “Mrs. Rochester, —— Hotel, London,” on each: I could notpersuade myself to affix them, or to have them affixed. Mrs. Rochester!She did not exist: she would not be born till to-morrow, some timeafter eight o’clock A.M.; and I would wait to be assured she had comeinto the world alive before I assigned to her all that property. It wasenough that in yonder closet, opposite my dressing-table, garments saidto be hers had already displaced my black stuff Lowood frock and strawbonnet: for not to me appertained that suit of wedding raiment; thepearl-coloured robe, the vapoury veil pendent from the usurpedportmanteau. I shut the closet to conceal the strange, wraith-likeapparel it contained; which, at this evening hour—nine o’clock—gave outcertainly a most ghostly shimmer through the shadow of my apartment. “Iwill leave you by yourself, white dream,” I said. “I am feverish: Ihear the wind blowing: I will go out of doors and feel it.”It was not only the hurry of preparation that made me feverish; notonly the anticipation of the great change—the new life which was tocommence to-morrow: both these circumstances had their share,doubtless, in producing that restless, excited mood which hurried meforth at this late hour into the darkening grounds: but a third causeinfluenced my mind more than they.I had at heart a strange and anxious thought. Something had happenedwhich I could not comprehend; no one knew of or had seen the event butmyself: it had taken place the preceding night. Mr. Rochester thatnight was absent from home; nor was he yet returned: business hadcalled him to a small estate of two or three farms he possessed thirtymiles off—business it was requisite he should settle in person,previous to his meditated departure from England. I waited now hisreturn; eager to disburthen my mind, and to seek of him the solution ofthe enigma that perplexed me. Stay till he comes, reader; and, when Idisclose my secret to him, you shall share the confidence.I sought the orchard, driven to its shelter by the wind, which all dayhad blown strong and full from the south, without, however, bringing aspeck of rain. Instead of subsiding as night drew on, it seemed toaugment its rush and deepen its roar: the trees blew steadfastly oneway, never writhing round, and scarcely tossing back their boughs oncein an hour; so continuous was the strain bending their branchy headsnorthward—the clouds drifted from pole to pole, fast following, mass onmass: no glimpse of blue sky had been visible that July day.It was not without a certain wild pleasure I ran before the wind,delivering my trouble of mind to the measureless air-torrent thunderingthrough space. Descending the laurel walk, I faced the wreck of thechestnut-tree; it stood up black and riven: the trunk, split down thecentre, gasped ghastly. The cloven halves were not broken from eachother, for the firm base and strong roots kept them unsundered below;though community of vitality was destroyed—the sap could flow no more:their great boughs on each side were dead, and next winter’s tempestswould be sure to fell one or both to earth: as yet, however, they mightbe said to form one tree—a ruin, but an entire ruin.“You did right to hold fast to each other,” I said: as if themonster-splinters were living things, and could hear me. “I think,scathed as you look, and charred and scorched, there must be a littlesense of life in you yet, rising out of that adhesion at the faithful,honest roots: you will never have green leaves more—never more seebirds making nests and singing idyls in your boughs; the time ofpleasure and love is over with you: but you are not desolate: each ofyou has a comrade to sympathise with him in his decay.” As I looked upat them, the moon appeared momentarily in that part of the sky whichfilled their fissure; her disk was blood-red and half overcast; sheseemed to throw on me one bewildered, dreary glance, and buried herselfagain instantly in the deep drift of cloud. The wind fell, for asecond, round Thornfield; but far away over wood and water, poured awild, melancholy wail: it was sad to listen to, and I ran off again.Here and there I strayed through the orchard, gathered up the appleswith which the grass round the tree roots was thickly strewn; then Iemployed myself in dividing the ripe from the unripe; I carried theminto the house and put them away in the store-room. Then I repaired tothe library to ascertain whether the fire was lit, for, though summer,I knew on such a gloomy evening Mr. Rochester would like to see acheerful hearth when he came in: yes, the fire had been kindled sometime, and burnt well. I placed his arm-chair by the chimney-corner: Iwheeled the table near it: I let down the curtain, and had the candlesbrought in ready for lighting. More restless than ever, when I hadcompleted these arrangements I could not sit still, nor even remain inthe house: a little time-piece in the room and the old clock in thehall simultaneously struck ten.“How late it grows!” I said. “I will run down to the gates: it ismoonlight at intervals; I can see a good way on the road. He may becoming now, and to meet him will save some minutes of suspense.”The wind roared high in the great trees which embowered the gates; butthe road as far as I could see, to the right hand and the left, was allstill and solitary: save for the shadows of clouds crossing it atintervals as the moon looked out, it was but a long pale line, unvariedby one moving speck.A puerile tear dimmed my eye while I looked—a tear of disappointmentand impatience; ashamed of it, I wiped it away. I lingered; the moonshut herself wholly within her chamber, and drew close her curtain ofdense cloud: the night grew dark; rain came driving fast on the gale.“I wish he would come! I wish he would come!” I exclaimed, seized withhypochondriac foreboding. I had expected his arrival before tea; now itwas dark: what could keep him? Had an accident happened? The event oflast night again recurred to me. I interpreted it as a warning ofdisaster. I feared my hopes were too bright to be realised; and I hadenjoyed so much bliss lately that I imagined my fortune had passed itsmeridian, and must now decline.“Well, I cannot return to the house,” I thought; “I cannot sit by thefireside, while he is abroad in inclement weather: better tire my limbsthan strain my heart; I will go forward and meet him.”I set out; I walked fast, but not far: ere I had measured a quarter ofa mile, I heard the tramp of hoofs; a horseman came on, full gallop; adog ran by his side. Away with evil presentiment! It was he: here hewas, mounted on Mesrour, followed by Pilot. He saw me; for the moon hadopened a blue field in the sky, and rode in it watery bright: he tookhis hat off, and waved it round his head. I now ran to meet him.“There!” he exclaimed, as he stretched out his hand and bent from thesaddle: “You can’t do without me, that is evident. Step on my boot-toe;give me both hands: mount!”I obeyed: joy made me agile: I sprang up before him. A hearty kissing Igot for a welcome, and some boastful triumph, which I swallowed as wellas I could. He checked himself in his exultation to demand, “But isthere anything the matter, Janet, that you come to meet me at such anhour? Is there anything wrong?”“No, but I thought you would never come. I could not bear to wait inthe house for you, especially with this rain and wind.”“Rain and wind, indeed! Yes, you are dripping like a mermaid; pull mycloak round you: but I think you are feverish, Jane: both your cheekand hand are burning hot. I ask again, is there anything the matter?”“Nothing now; I am neither afraid nor unhappy.”“Then you have been both?”“Rather: but I’ll tell you all about it by-and-bye, sir; and I daresayyou will only laugh at me for my pains.”“I’ll laugh at you heartily when to-morrow is past; till then I darenot: my prize is not certain. This is you, who have been as slippery asan eel this last month, and as thorny as a briar-rose? I could not laya finger anywhere but I was pricked; and now I seem to have gathered upa stray lamb in my arms. You wandered out of the fold to seek yourshepherd, did you, Jane?”“I wanted you: but don’t boast. Here we are at Thornfield: now let meget down.”He landed me on the pavement. As John took his horse, and he followedme into the hall, he told me to make haste and put something dry on,and then return to him in the library; and he stopped me, as I made forthe staircase, to extort a promise that I would not be long: nor was Ilong; in five minutes I rejoined him. I found him at supper.“Take a seat and bear me company, Jane: please God, it is the last mealbut one you will eat at Thornfield Hall for a long time.”I sat down near him, but told him I could not eat.“Is it because you have the prospect of a journey before you, Jane? Isit the thoughts of going to London that takes away your appetite?”“I cannot see my prospects clearly to-night, sir; and I hardly knowwhat thoughts I have in my head. Everything in life seems unreal.”“Except me: I am substantial enough—touch me.”“You, sir, are the most phantom-like of all: you are a mere dream.”He held out his hand, laughing. “Is that a dream?” said he, placing itclose to my eyes. He had a rounded, muscular, and vigorous hand, aswell as a long, strong arm.“Yes; though I touch it, it is a dream,” said I, as I put it down frombefore my face. “Sir, have you finished supper?”“Yes, Jane.”I rang the bell and ordered away the tray. When we were again alone, Istirred the fire, and then took a low seat at my master’s knee.“It is near midnight,” I said.“Yes: but remember, Jane, you promised to wake with me the night beforemy wedding.”“I did; and I will keep my promise, for an hour or two at least: I haveno wish to go to bed.”“Are all your arrangements complete?”“All, sir.”“And on my part likewise,” he returned, “I have settled everything; andwe shall leave Thornfield to-morrow, within half-an-hour after ourreturn from church.”“Very well, sir.”“With what an extraordinary smile you uttered that word—‘very well,’Jane! What a bright spot of colour you have on each cheek! and howstrangely your eyes glitter! Are you well?”“I believe I am.”“Believe! What is the matter? Tell me what you feel.”“I could not, sir: no words could tell you what I feel. I wish thispresent hour would never end: who knows with what fate the next maycome charged?”“This is hypochondria, Jane. You have been over-excited, orover-fatigued.”“Do you, sir, feel calm and happy?”“Calm?—no: but happy—to the heart’s core.”I looked up at him to read the signs of bliss in his face: it wasardent and flushed.“Give me your confidence, Jane,” he said: “relieve your mind of anyweight that oppresses it, by imparting it to me. What do you fear?—thatI shall not prove a good husband?”“It is the idea farthest from my thoughts.”“Are you apprehensive of the new sphere you are about to enter?—of thenew life into which you are passing?”“No.”“You puzzle me, Jane: your look and tone of sorrowful audacity perplexand pain me. I want an explanation.”“Then, sir, listen. You were from home last night?”“I was: I know that; and you hinted a while ago at something which hadhappened in my absence:—nothing, probably, of consequence; but, inshort, it has disturbed you. Let me hear it. Mrs. Fairfax has saidsomething, perhaps? or you have overheard the servants talk?—yoursensitive self-respect has been wounded?”“No, sir.” It struck twelve—I waited till the time-piece had concludedits silver chime, and the clock its hoarse, vibrating stroke, and thenI proceeded.“All day yesterday I was very busy, and very happy in my ceaselessbustle; for I am not, as you seem to think, troubled by any hauntingfears about the new sphere, et cetera: I think it a glorious thing tohave the hope of living with you, because I love you. No, sir, don’tcaress me now—let me talk undisturbed. Yesterday I trusted well inProvidence, and believed that events were working together for yourgood and mine: it was a fine day, if you recollect—the calmness of theair and sky forbade apprehensions respecting your safety or comfort onyour journey. I walked a little while on the pavement after tea,thinking of you; and I beheld you in imagination so near me, I scarcelymissed your actual presence. I thought of the life that lay beforeme—_your_ life, sir—an existence more expansive and stirring than myown: as much more so as the depths of the sea to which the brook runsare than the shallows of its own strait channel. I wondered whymoralists call this world a dreary wilderness: for me it blossomed likea rose. Just at sunset, the air turned cold and the sky cloudy: I wentin, Sophie called me upstairs to look at my wedding-dress, which theyhad just brought; and under it in the box I found your present—the veilwhich, in your princely extravagance, you sent for from London:resolved, I suppose, since I would not have jewels, to cheat me intoaccepting something as costly. I smiled as I unfolded it, and devisedhow I would tease you about your aristocratic tastes, and your effortsto masque your plebeian bride in the attributes of a peeress. I thoughthow I would carry down to you the square of unembroidered blond I hadmyself prepared as a covering for my low-born head, and ask if that wasnot good enough for a woman who could bring her husband neitherfortune, beauty, nor connections. I saw plainly how you would look; andheard your impetuous republican answers, and your haughty disavowal ofany necessity on your part to augment your wealth, or elevate yourstanding, by marrying either a purse or a coronet.”“How well you read me, you witch!” interposed Mr. Rochester: “but whatdid you find in the veil besides its embroidery? Did you find poison,or a dagger, that you look so mournful now?”“No, no, sir; besides the delicacy and richness of the fabric, I foundnothing save Fairfax Rochester’s pride; and that did not scare me,because I am used to the sight of the demon. But, sir, as it grew dark,the wind rose: it blew yesterday evening, not as it blows now—wild andhigh—but ‘with a sullen, moaning sound’ far more eerie. I wished youwere at home. I came into this room, and the sight of the empty chairand fireless hearth chilled me. For some time after I went to bed, Icould not sleep—a sense of anxious excitement distressed me. The galestill rising, seemed to my ear to muffle a mournful under-sound;whether in the house or abroad I could not at first tell, but itrecurred, doubtful yet doleful at every lull; at last I made out itmust be some dog howling at a distance. I was glad when it ceased. Onsleeping, I continued in dreams the idea of a dark and gusty night. Icontinued also the wish to be with you, and experienced a strange,regretful consciousness of some barrier dividing us. During all myfirst sleep, I was following the windings of an unknown road; totalobscurity environed me; rain pelted me; I was burdened with the chargeof a little child: a very small creature, too young and feeble to walk,and which shivered in my cold arms, and wailed piteously in my ear. Ithought, sir, that you were on the road a long way before me; and Istrained every nerve to overtake you, and made effort on effort toutter your name and entreat you to stop—but my movements were fettered,and my voice still died away inarticulate; while you, I felt, withdrewfarther and farther every moment.”“And these dreams weigh on your spirits now, Jane, when I am close toyou? Little nervous subject! Forget visionary woe, and think only ofreal happiness! You say you love me, Janet: yes—I will not forget that;and you cannot deny it. _Those_ words did not die inarticulate on yourlips. I heard them clear and soft: a thought too solemn perhaps, butsweet as music—‘I think it is a glorious thing to have the hope ofliving with you, Edward, because I love you.’ Do you love me,Jane?—repeat it.”“I do, sir—I do, with my whole heart.”“Well,” he said, after some minutes’ silence, “it is strange; but thatsentence has penetrated my breast painfully. Why? I think because yousaid it with such an earnest, religious energy, and because your upwardgaze at me now is the very sublime of faith, truth, and devotion: it istoo much as if some spirit were near me. Look wicked, Jane: as you knowwell how to look: coin one of your wild, shy, provoking smiles; tell meyou hate me—tease me, vex me; do anything but move me: I would ratherbe incensed than saddened.”“I will tease you and vex you to your heart’s content, when I havefinished my tale: but hear me to the end.”“I thought, Jane, you had told me all. I thought I had found the sourceof your melancholy in a dream.”I shook my head. “What! is there more? But I will not believe it to beanything important. I warn you of incredulity beforehand. Go on.”The disquietude of his air, the somewhat apprehensive impatience of hismanner, surprised me: but I proceeded.“I dreamt another dream, sir: that Thornfield Hall was a dreary ruin,the retreat of bats and owls. I thought that of all the stately frontnothing remained but a shell-like wall, very high and veryfragile-looking. I wandered, on a moonlight night, through thegrass-grown enclosure within: here I stumbled over a marble hearth, andthere over a fallen fragment of cornice. Wrapped up in a shawl, I stillcarried the unknown little child: I might not lay it down anywhere,however tired were my arms—however much its weight impeded my progress,I must retain it. I heard the gallop of a horse at a distance on theroad; I was sure it was you; and you were departing for many years andfor a distant country. I climbed the thin wall with frantic periloushaste, eager to catch one glimpse of you from the top: the stonesrolled from under my feet, the ivy branches I grasped gave way, thechild clung round my neck in terror, and almost strangled me; at last Igained the summit. I saw you like a speck on a white track, lesseningevery moment. The blast blew so strong I could not stand. I sat down onthe narrow ledge; I hushed the scared infant in my lap: you turned anangle of the road: I bent forward to take a last look; the wallcrumbled; I was shaken; the child rolled from my knee, I lost mybalance, fell, and woke.”“Now, Jane, that is all.”“All the preface, sir; the tale is yet to come. On waking, a gleamdazzled my eyes; I thought—Oh, it is daylight! But I was mistaken; itwas only candlelight. Sophie, I supposed, had come in. There was alight in the dressing-table, and the door of the closet, where, beforegoing to bed, I had hung my wedding-dress and veil, stood open; I hearda rustling there. I asked, ‘Sophie, what are you doing?’ No oneanswered; but a form emerged from the closet; it took the light, heldit aloft, and surveyed the garments pendent from the portmanteau.‘Sophie! Sophie!’ I again cried: and still it was silent. I had risenup in bed, I bent forward: first surprise, then bewilderment, came overme; and then my blood crept cold through my veins. Mr. Rochester, thiswas not Sophie, it was not Leah, it was not Mrs. Fairfax: it wasnot—no, I was sure of it, and am still—it was not even that strangewoman, Grace Poole.”“It must have been one of them,” interrupted my master.“No, sir, I solemnly assure you to the contrary. The shape standingbefore me had never crossed my eyes within the precincts of ThornfieldHall before; the height, the contour were new to me.”“Describe it, Jane.”“It seemed, sir, a woman, tall and large, with thick and dark hairhanging long down her back. I know not what dress she had on: it waswhite and straight; but whether gown, sheet, or shroud, I cannot tell.”“Did you see her face?”“Not at first. But presently she took my veil from its place; she heldit up, gazed at it long, and then she threw it over her own head, andturned to the mirror. At that moment I saw the reflection of the visageand features quite distinctly in the dark oblong glass.”“And how were they?”“Fearful and ghastly to me—oh, sir, I never saw a face like it! It wasa discoloured face—it was a savage face. I wish I could forget the rollof the red eyes and the fearful blackened inflation of the lineaments!”“Ghosts are usually pale, Jane.”“This, sir, was purple: the lips were swelled and dark; the browfurrowed: the black eyebrows widely raised over the bloodshot eyes.Shall I tell you of what it reminded me?”“You may.”“Of the foul German spectre—the Vampyre.”“Ah!—what did it do?”“Sir, it removed my veil from its gaunt head, rent it in two parts, andflinging both on the floor, trampled on them.”It removed my veil from its gaunt head, rent it in two parts, andflinging both on the floor, trampled on them“Afterwards?”“It drew aside the window-curtain and looked out; perhaps it saw dawnapproaching, for, taking the candle, it retreated to the door. Just atmy bedside, the figure stopped: the fiery eyes glared upon me—shethrust up her candle close to my face, and extinguished it under myeyes. I was aware her lurid visage flamed over mine, and I lostconsciousness: for the second time in my life—only the second time—Ibecame insensible from terror.”“Who was with you when you revived?”“No one, sir, but the broad day. I rose, bathed my head and face inwater, drank a long draught; felt that though enfeebled I was not ill,and determined that to none but you would I impart this vision. Now,sir, tell me who and what that woman was?”“The creature of an over-stimulated brain; that is certain. I must becareful of you, my treasure: nerves like yours were not made for roughhandling.”“Sir, depend on it, my nerves were not in fault; the thing was real:the transaction actually took place.”“And your previous dreams, were they real too? Is Thornfield Hall aruin? Am I severed from you by insuperable obstacles? Am I leaving youwithout a tear—without a kiss—without a word?”“Not yet.”“Am I about to do it? Why, the day is already commenced which is tobind us indissolubly; and when we are once united, there shall be norecurrence of these mental terrors: I guarantee that.”“Mental terrors, sir! I wish I could believe them to be only such: Iwish it more now than ever; since even you cannot explain to me themystery of that awful visitant.”“And since I cannot do it, Jane, it must have been unreal.”“But, sir, when I said so to myself on rising this morning, and when Ilooked round the room to gather courage and comfort from the cheerfulaspect of each familiar object in full daylight, there—on the carpet—Isaw what gave the distinct lie to my hypothesis,—the veil, torn fromtop to bottom in two halves!”I felt Mr. Rochester start and shudder; he hastily flung his arms roundme. “Thank God!” he exclaimed, “that if anything malignant did comenear you last night, it was only the veil that was harmed. Oh, to thinkwhat might have happened!”He drew his breath short, and strained me so close to him, I couldscarcely pant. After some minutes’ silence, he continued, cheerily—“Now, Janet, I’ll explain to you all about it. It was half dream, halfreality. A woman did, I doubt not, enter your room: and that womanwas—must have been—Grace Poole. You call her a strange being yourself:from all you know, you have reason so to call her—what did she do tome? what to Mason? In a state between sleeping and waking, you noticedher entrance and her actions; but feverish, almost delirious as youwere, you ascribed to her a goblin appearance different from her own:the long dishevelled hair, the swelled black face, the exaggeratedstature, were figments of imagination; results of nightmare: thespiteful tearing of the veil was real: and it is like her. I see youwould ask why I keep such a woman in my house: when we have beenmarried a year and a day, I will tell you; but not now. Are yousatisfied, Jane? Do you accept my solution of the mystery?”I reflected, and in truth it appeared to me the only possible one:satisfied I was not, but to please him I endeavoured to appearso—relieved, I certainly did feel; so I answered him with a contentedsmile. And now, as it was long past one, I prepared to leave him.“Does not Sophie sleep with Adèle in the nursery?” he asked, as I litmy candle.“Yes, sir.”“And there is room enough in Adèle’s little bed for you. You must shareit with her to-night, Jane: it is no wonder that the incident you haverelated should make you nervous, and I would rather you did not sleepalone: promise me to go to the nursery.”“I shall be very glad to do so, sir.”“And fasten the door securely on the inside. Wake Sophie when you goupstairs, under pretence of requesting her to rouse you in good timeto-morrow; for you must be dressed and have finished breakfast beforeeight. And now, no more sombre thoughts: chase dull care away, Janet.Don’t you hear to what soft whispers the wind has fallen? and there isno more beating of rain against the window-panes: look here” (he liftedup the curtain)—“it is a lovely night!”It was. Half heaven was pure and stainless: the clouds, now troopingbefore the wind, which had shifted to the west, were filing offeastward in long, silvered columns. The moon shone peacefully.“Well,” said Mr. Rochester, gazing inquiringly into my eyes, “how is myJanet now?”“The night is serene, sir; and so am I.”“And you will not dream of separation and sorrow to-night; but of happylove and blissful union.”This prediction was but half fulfilled: I did not indeed dream ofsorrow, but as little did I dream of joy; for I never slept at all.With little Adèle in my arms, I watched the slumber of childhood—sotranquil, so passionless, so innocent—and waited for the coming day:all my life was awake and astir in my frame: and as soon as the sunrose I rose too. I remember Adèle clung to me as I left her: I rememberI kissed her as I loosened her little hands from my neck; and I criedover her with strange emotion, and quitted her because I feared my sobswould break her still sound repose. She seemed the emblem of my pastlife; and he, I was now to array myself to meet, the dread, but adored,type of my unknown future day.CHAPTER XXVISophie came at seven to dress me: she was very long indeed inaccomplishing her task; so long that Mr. Rochester, grown, I suppose,impatient of my delay, sent up to ask why I did not come. She was justfastening my veil (the plain square of blond after all) to my hair witha brooch; I hurried from under her hands as soon as I could.“Stop!” she cried in French. “Look at yourself in the mirror: you havenot taken one peep.”So I turned at the door: I saw a robed and veiled figure, so unlike myusual self that it seemed almost the image of a stranger. “Jane!”called a voice, and I hastened down. I was received at the foot of thestairs by Mr. Rochester.“Lingerer!” he said, “my brain is on fire with impatience, and youtarry so long!”He took me into the dining-room, surveyed me keenly all over,pronounced me “fair as a lily, and not only the pride of his life, butthe desire of his eyes,” and then telling me he would give me but tenminutes to eat some breakfast, he rang the bell. One of his latelyhired servants, a footman, answered it.“Is John getting the carriage ready?”“Yes, sir.”“Is the luggage brought down?”“They are bringing it down, sir.”“Go you to the church: see if Mr. Wood (the clergyman) and the clerkare there: return and tell me.”The church, as the reader knows, was but just beyond the gates; thefootman soon returned.“Mr. Wood is in the vestry, sir, putting on his surplice.”“And the carriage?”“The horses are harnessing.”“We shall not want it to go to church; but it must be ready the momentwe return: all the boxes and luggage arranged and strapped on, and thecoachman in his seat.”“Yes, sir.”“Jane, are you ready?”I rose. There were no groomsmen, no bridesmaids, no relatives to waitfor or marshal: none but Mr. Rochester and I. Mrs. Fairfax stood in thehall as we passed. I would fain have spoken to her, but my hand washeld by a grasp of iron: I was hurried along by a stride I could hardlyfollow; and to look at Mr. Rochester’s face was to feel that not asecond of delay would be tolerated for any purpose. I wonder what otherbridegroom ever looked as he did—so bent up to a purpose, so grimlyresolute: or who, under such steadfast brows, ever revealed suchflaming and flashing eyes.I know not whether the day was fair or foul; in descending the drive, Igazed neither on sky nor earth: my heart was with my eyes; and bothseemed migrated into Mr. Rochester’s frame. I wanted to see theinvisible thing on which, as we went along, he appeared to fasten aglance fierce and fell. I wanted to feel the thoughts whose force heseemed breasting and resisting.At the churchyard wicket he stopped: he discovered I was quite out ofbreath. “Am I cruel in my love?” he said. “Delay an instant: lean onme, Jane.”And now I can recall the picture of the grey old house of God risingcalm before me, of a rook wheeling round the steeple, of a ruddymorning sky beyond. I remember something, too, of the greengrave-mounds; and I have not forgotten, either, two figures ofstrangers straying amongst the low hillocks and reading the mementoesgraven on the few mossy head-stones. I noticed them, because, as theysaw us, they passed round to the back of the church; and I doubted notthey were going to enter by the side-aisle door and witness theceremony. By Mr. Rochester they were not observed; he was earnestlylooking at my face, from which the blood had, I daresay, momentarilyfled: for I felt my forehead dewy, and my cheeks and lips cold. When Irallied, which I soon did, he walked gently with me up the path to theporch.We entered the quiet and humble temple; the priest waited in his whitesurplice at the lowly altar, the clerk beside him. All was still: twoshadows only moved in a remote corner. My conjecture had been correct:the strangers had slipped in before us, and they now stood by the vaultof the Rochesters, their backs towards us, viewing through the railsthe old time-stained marble tomb, where a kneeling angel guarded theremains of Damer de Rochester, slain at Marston Moor in the time of thecivil wars, and of Elizabeth, his wife.Our place was taken at the communion rails. Hearing a cautious stepbehind me, I glanced over my shoulder: one of the strangers—agentleman, evidently—was advancing up the chancel. The service began.The explanation of the intent of matrimony was gone through; and thenthe clergyman came a step further forward, and, bending slightlytowards Mr. Rochester, went on.“I require and charge you both (as ye will answer at the dreadful dayof judgment, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed), thatif either of you know any impediment why ye may not lawfully be joinedtogether in matrimony, ye do now confess it; for be ye well assuredthat so many as are coupled together otherwise than God’s Word dothallow, are not joined together by God, neither is their matrimonylawful.”He paused, as the custom is. When is the pause after that sentence everbroken by reply? Not, perhaps, once in a hundred years. And theclergyman, who had not lifted his eyes from his book, and had held hisbreath but for a moment, was proceeding: his hand was already stretchedtowards Mr. Rochester, as his lips unclosed to ask, “Wilt thou havethis woman for thy wedded wife?”—when a distinct and near voice said—“The marriage cannot go on: I declare the existence of an impediment.”The clergyman looked up at the speaker and stood mute; the clerk didthe same; Mr. Rochester moved slightly, as if an earthquake had rolledunder his feet: taking a firmer footing, and not turning his head oreyes, he said, “Proceed.”Profound silence fell when he had uttered that word, with deep but lowintonation. Presently Mr. Wood said—“I cannot proceed without some investigation into what has beenasserted, and evidence of its truth or falsehood.”“The ceremony is quite broken off,” subjoined the voice behind us. “Iam in a condition to prove my allegation: an insuperable impediment tothis marriage exists.”Mr. Rochester heard, but heeded not: he stood stubborn and rigid,making no movement but to possess himself of my hand. What a hot andstrong grasp he had! and how like quarried marble was his pale, firm,massive front at this moment! How his eye shone, still watchful, andyet wild beneath!Mr. Wood seemed at a loss. “What is the nature of the impediment?” heasked. “Perhaps it may be got over—explained away?”“Hardly,” was the answer. “I have called it insuperable, and I speakadvisedly.”The speaker came forward and leaned on the rails. He continued,uttering each word distinctly, calmly, steadily, but not loudly—“It simply consists in the existence of a previous marriage. Mr.Rochester has a wife now living.”My nerves vibrated to those low-spoken words as they had never vibratedto thunder—my blood felt their subtle violence as it had never feltfrost or fire; but I was collected, and in no danger of swooning. Ilooked at Mr. Rochester: I made him look at me. His whole face wascolourless rock: his eye was both spark and flint. He disavowednothing: he seemed as if he would defy all things. Without speaking,without smiling, without seeming to recognise in me a human being, heonly twined my waist with his arm and riveted me to his side.“Who are you?” he asked of the intruder.“My name is Briggs, a solicitor of —— Street, London.”“And you would thrust on me a wife?”“I would remind you of your lady’s existence, sir, which the lawrecognises, if you do not.”“Favour me with an account of her—with her name, her parentage, herplace of abode.”“Certainly.” Mr. Briggs calmly took a paper from his pocket, and readout in a sort of official, nasal voice:—“‘I affirm and can prove that on the 20th of October A.D. —— (a date offifteen years back), Edward Fairfax Rochester, of Thornfield Hall, inthe county of ——, and of Ferndean Manor, in ——shire, England, wasmarried to my sister, Bertha Antoinetta Mason, daughter of Jonas Mason,merchant, and of Antoinetta his wife, a Creole, at —— church, SpanishTown, Jamaica. The record of the marriage will be found in the registerof that church—a copy of it is now in my possession. Signed, RichardMason.’”“That—if a genuine document—may prove I have been married, but it doesnot prove that the woman mentioned therein as my wife is still living.”“She was living three months ago,” returned the lawyer.“How do you know?”“I have a witness to the fact, whose testimony even you, sir, willscarcely controvert.”“Produce him—or go to hell.”“I will produce him first—he is on the spot. Mr. Mason, have thegoodness to step forward.”Mr. Rochester, on hearing the name, set his teeth; he experienced, too,a sort of strong convulsive quiver; near to him as I was, I felt thespasmodic movement of fury or despair run through his frame. The secondstranger, who had hitherto lingered in the background, now drew near; apale face looked over the solicitor’s shoulder—yes, it was Masonhimself. Mr. Rochester turned and glared at him. His eye, as I haveoften said, was a black eye: it had now a tawny, nay, a bloody light inits gloom; and his face flushed—olive cheek and hueless foreheadreceived a glow as from spreading, ascending heart-fire: and hestirred, lifted his strong arm—he could have struck Mason, dashed himon the church-floor, shocked by ruthless blow the breath from hisbody—but Mason shrank away, and cried faintly, “Good God!” Contemptfell cool on Mr. Rochester—his passion died as if a blight hadshrivelled it up: he only asked—“What have _you_ to say?”An inaudible reply escaped Mason’s white lips.“The devil is in it if you cannot answer distinctly. I again demand,what have _you_ to say?”“Sir—sir,” interrupted the clergyman, “do not forget you are in asacred place.” Then addressing Mason, he inquired gently, “Are youaware, sir, whether or not this gentleman’s wife is still living?”“Courage,” urged the lawyer,—“speak out.”“She is now living at Thornfield Hall,” said Mason, in more articulatetones: “I saw her there last April. I am her brother.”“At Thornfield Hall!” ejaculated the clergyman. “Impossible! I am anold resident in this neighbourhood, sir, and I never heard of a Mrs.Rochester at Thornfield Hall.”I saw a grim smile contort Mr. Rochester’s lips, and he muttered—“No, by God! I took care that none should hear of it—or of her underthat name.” He mused—for ten minutes he held counsel with himself: heformed his resolve, and announced it—“Enough! all shall bolt out at once, like the bullet from the barrel.Wood, close your book and take off your surplice; John Green (to theclerk), leave the church: there will be no wedding to-day.” The manobeyed.Mr. Rochester continued, hardily and recklessly: “Bigamy is an uglyword!—I meant, however, to be a bigamist; but fate has out-manoeuvredme, or Providence has checked me,—perhaps the last. I am little betterthan a devil at this moment; and, as my pastor there would tell me,deserve no doubt the sternest judgments of God, even to the quenchlessfire and deathless worm. Gentlemen, my plan is broken up:—what thislawyer and his client say is true: I have been married, and the womanto whom I was married lives! You say you never heard of a Mrs.Rochester at the house up yonder, Wood; but I daresay you have many atime inclined your ear to gossip about the mysterious lunatic keptthere under watch and ward. Some have whispered to you that she is mybastard half-sister: some, my cast-off mistress. I now inform you thatshe is my wife, whom I married fifteen years ago,—Bertha Mason by name;sister of this resolute personage, who is now, with his quivering limbsand white cheeks, showing you what a stout heart men may bear. Cheerup, Dick!—never fear me!—I’d almost as soon strike a woman as you.Bertha Mason is mad; and she came of a mad family; idiots and maniacsthrough three generations! Her mother, the Creole, was both a madwomanand a drunkard!—as I found out after I had wed the daughter: for theywere silent on family secrets before. Bertha, like a dutiful child,copied her parent in both points. I had a charming partner—pure, wise,modest: you can fancy I was a happy man. I went through rich scenes!Oh! my experience has been heavenly, if you only knew it! But I owe youno further explanation. Briggs, Wood, Mason, I invite you all to comeup to the house and visit Mrs. Poole’s patient, and _my wife_! Youshall see what sort of a being I was cheated into espousing, and judgewhether or not I had a right to break the compact, and seek sympathywith something at least human. This girl,” he continued, looking at me,“knew no more than you, Wood, of the disgusting secret: she thought allwas fair and legal; and never dreamt she was going to be entrapped intoa feigned union with a defrauded wretch, already bound to a bad, mad,and embruted partner! Come all of you—follow!”Still holding me fast, he left the church: the three gentlemen cameafter. At the front door of the hall we found the carriage.“Take it back to the coach-house, John,” said Mr. Rochester coolly; “itwill not be wanted to-day.”At our entrance, Mrs. Fairfax, Adèle, Sophie, Leah, advanced to meetand greet us.“To the right-about—every soul!” cried the master; “away with yourcongratulations! Who wants them? Not I!—they are fifteen years toolate!”He passed on and ascended the stairs, still holding my hand, and stillbeckoning the gentlemen to follow him, which they did. We mounted thefirst staircase, passed up the gallery, proceeded to the third storey:the low, black door, opened by Mr. Rochester’s master-key, admitted usto the tapestried room, with its great bed and its pictorial cabinet.“You know this place, Mason,” said our guide; “she bit and stabbed youhere.”He lifted the hangings from the wall, uncovering the second door: this,too, he opened. In a room without a window, there burnt a fire guardedby a high and strong fender, and a lamp suspended from the ceiling by achain. Grace Poole bent over the fire, apparently cooking something ina saucepan. In the deep shade, at the farther end of the room, a figureran backwards and forwards. What it was, whether beast or human being,one could not, at first sight, tell: it grovelled, seemingly, on allfours; it snatched and growled like some strange wild animal: but itwas covered with clothing, and a quantity of dark, grizzled hair, wildas a mane, hid its head and face.“Good-morrow, Mrs. Poole!” said Mr. Rochester. “How are you? and how isyour charge to-day?”“We’re tolerable, sir, I thank you,” replied Grace, lifting the boilingmess carefully on to the hob: “rather snappish, but not ’rageous.”A fierce cry seemed to give the lie to her favourable report: theclothed hyena rose up, and stood tall on its hind-feet.“Ah! sir, she sees you!” exclaimed Grace: “you’d better not stay.”“Only a few moments, Grace: you must allow me a few moments.”“Take care then, sir!—for God’s sake, take care!”The maniac bellowed: she parted her shaggy locks from her visage, andgazed wildly at her visitors. I recognised well that purple face,—thosebloated features. Mrs. Poole advanced.“Keep out of the way,” said Mr. Rochester, thrusting her aside: “shehas no knife now, I suppose, and I’m on my guard.”“One never knows what she has, sir: she is so cunning: it is not inmortal discretion to fathom her craft.”“We had better leave her,” whispered Mason.“Go to the devil!” was his brother-in-law’s recommendation.“’Ware!” cried Grace. The three gentlemen retreated simultaneously. Mr.Rochester flung me behind him: the lunatic sprang and grappled histhroat viciously, and laid her teeth to his cheek: they struggled. Shewas a big woman, in stature almost equalling her husband, and corpulentbesides: she showed virile force in the contest—more than once shealmost throttled him, athletic as he was. He could have settled herwith a well-planted blow; but he would not strike: he would onlywrestle. At last he mastered her arms; Grace Poole gave him a cord, andhe pinioned them behind her: with more rope, which was at hand, hebound her to a chair. The operation was performed amidst the fiercestyells and the most convulsive plunges. Mr. Rochester then turned to thespectators: he looked at them with a smile both acrid and desolate.“That is _my wife_,” said he. “Such is the sole conjugal embrace I amever to know—such are the endearments which are to solace my leisurehours! And _this_ is what I wished to have” (laying his hand on myshoulder): “this young girl, who stands so grave and quiet at the mouthof hell, looking collectedly at the gambols of a demon, I wanted herjust as a change after that fierce ragout. Wood and Briggs, look at thedifference! Compare these clear eyes with the red balls yonder—thisface with that mask—this form with that bulk; then judge me, priest ofthe gospel and man of the law, and remember with what judgment ye judgeye shall be judged! Off with you now. I must shut up my prize.”We all withdrew. Mr. Rochester stayed a moment behind us, to give somefurther order to Grace Poole. The solicitor addressed me as hedescended the stair.“You, madam,” said he, “are cleared from all blame: your uncle will beglad to hear it—if, indeed, he should be still living—when Mr. Masonreturns to Madeira.”“My uncle! What of him? Do you know him?”“Mr. Mason does. Mr. Eyre has been the Funchal correspondent of hishouse for some years. When your uncle received your letter intimatingthe contemplated union between yourself and Mr. Rochester, Mr. Mason,who was staying at Madeira to recruit his health, on his way back toJamaica, happened to be with him. Mr. Eyre mentioned the intelligence;for he knew that my client here was acquainted with a gentleman of thename of Rochester. Mr. Mason, astonished and distressed as you maysuppose, revealed the real state of matters. Your uncle, I am sorry tosay, is now on a sick bed; from which, considering the nature of hisdisease—decline—and the stage it has reached, it is unlikely he willever rise. He could not then hasten to England himself, to extricateyou from the snare into which you had fallen, but he implored Mr. Masonto lose no time in taking steps to prevent the false marriage. Hereferred him to me for assistance. I used all despatch, and am thankfulI was not too late: as you, doubtless, must be also. Were I not morallycertain that your uncle will be dead ere you reach Madeira, I wouldadvise you to accompany Mr. Mason back; but as it is, I think you hadbetter remain in England till you can hear further, either from or ofMr. Eyre. Have we anything else to stay for?” he inquired of Mr. Mason.“No, no—let us be gone,” was the anxious reply; and without waiting totake leave of Mr. Rochester, they made their exit at the hall door. Theclergyman stayed to exchange a few sentences, either of admonition orreproof, with his haughty parishioner; this duty done, he too departed.I heard him go as I stood at the half-open door of my own room, towhich I had now withdrawn. The house cleared, I shut myself in,fastened the bolt that none might intrude, and proceeded—not to weep,not to mourn, I was yet too calm for that, but—mechanically to take offthe wedding dress, and replace it by the stuff gown I had wornyesterday, as I thought, for the last time. I then sat down: I feltweak and tired. I leaned my arms on a table, and my head dropped onthem. And now I thought: till now I had only heard, seen,moved—followed up and down where I was led or dragged—watched eventrush on event, disclosure open beyond disclosure: but _now_, _Ithought_.The morning had been a quiet morning enough—all except the brief scenewith the lunatic: the transaction in the church had not been noisy;there was no explosion of passion, no loud altercation, no dispute, nodefiance or challenge, no tears, no sobs: a few words had been spoken,a calmly pronounced objection to the marriage made; some stern, shortquestions put by Mr. Rochester; answers, explanations given, evidenceadduced; an open admission of the truth had been uttered by my master;then the living proof had been seen; the intruders were gone, and allwas over.I was in my own room as usual—just myself, without obvious change:nothing had smitten me, or scathed me, or maimed me. And yet where wasthe Jane Eyre of yesterday?—where was her life?—where were herprospects?Jane Eyre, who had been an ardent, expectant woman—almost a bride, wasa cold, solitary girl again: her life was pale; her prospects weredesolate. A Christmas frost had come at midsummer; a white Decemberstorm had whirled over June; ice glazed the ripe apples, drifts crushedthe blowing roses; on hayfield and cornfield lay a frozen shroud: laneswhich last night blushed full of flowers, to-day were pathless withuntrodden snow; and the woods, which twelve hours since waved leafy andfragrant as groves between the tropics, now spread, waste, wild, andwhite as pine-forests in wintry Norway. My hopes were all dead—struckwith a subtle doom, such as, in one night, fell on all the first-bornin the land of Egypt. I looked on my cherished wishes, yesterday soblooming and glowing; they lay stark, chill, livid corpses that couldnever revive. I looked at my love: that feeling which was mymaster’s—which he had created; it shivered in my heart, like asuffering child in a cold cradle; sickness and anguish had seized it;it could not seek Mr. Rochester’s arms—it could not derive warmth fromhis breast. Oh, never more could it turn to him; for faith wasblighted—confidence destroyed! Mr. Rochester was not to me what he hadbeen; for he was not what I had thought him. I would not ascribe viceto him; I would not say he had betrayed me; but the attribute ofstainless truth was gone from his idea, and from his presence I mustgo: _that_ I perceived well. When—how—whither, I could not yet discern;but he himself, I doubted not, would hurry me from Thornfield. Realaffection, it seemed, he could not have for me; it had been only fitfulpassion: that was balked; he would want me no more. I should fear evento cross his path now: my view must be hateful to him. Oh, how blindhad been my eyes! How weak my conduct!My eyes were covered and closed: eddying darkness seemed to swim roundme, and reflection came in as black and confused a flow.Self-abandoned, relaxed, and effortless, I seemed to have laid me downin the dried-up bed of a great river; I heard a flood loosened inremote mountains, and felt the torrent come: to rise I had no will, toflee I had no strength. I lay faint, longing to be dead. One idea onlystill throbbed life-like within me—a remembrance of God: it begot anunuttered prayer: these words went wandering up and down in my raylessmind, as something that should be whispered, but no energy was found toexpress them—“Be not far from me, for trouble is near: there is none to help.”It was near: and as I had lifted no petition to Heaven to avert it—as Ihad neither joined my hands, nor bent my knees, nor moved my lips—itcame: in full heavy swing the torrent poured over me. The wholeconsciousness of my life lorn, my love lost, my hope quenched, my faithdeath-struck, swayed full and mighty above me in one sullen mass. Thatbitter hour cannot be described: in truth, “the waters came into mysoul; I sank in deep mire: I felt no standing; I came into deep waters;the floods overflowed me.”CHAPTER XXVIISome time in the afternoon I raised my head, and looking round andseeing the western sun gilding the sign of its decline on the wall, Iasked, “What am I to do?”But the answer my mind gave—“Leave Thornfield at once”—was so prompt,so dread, that I stopped my ears. I said I could not bear such wordsnow. “That I am not Edward Rochester’s bride is the least part of mywoe,” I alleged: “that I have wakened out of most glorious dreams, andfound them all void and vain, is a horror I could bear and master; butthat I must leave him decidedly, instantly, entirely, is intolerable. Icannot do it.”But, then, a voice within me averred that I could do it and foretoldthat I should do it. I wrestled with my own resolution: I wanted to beweak that I might avoid the awful passage of further suffering I sawlaid out for me; and Conscience, turned tyrant, held Passion by thethroat, told her tauntingly, she had yet but dipped her dainty foot inthe slough, and swore that with that arm of iron he would thrust herdown to unsounded depths of agony.“Let me be torn away, then” I cried. “Let another help me!”“No; you shall tear yourself away, none shall help you: you shallyourself pluck out your right eye; yourself cut off your right hand:your heart shall be the victim, and you the priest to transfix it.”I rose up suddenly, terror-struck at the solitude which so ruthless ajudge haunted,—at the silence which so awful a voice filled. My headswam as I stood erect. I perceived that I was sickening from excitementand inanition; neither meat nor drink had passed my lips that day, forI had taken no breakfast. And, with a strange pang, I now reflectedthat, long as I had been shut up here, no message had been sent to askhow I was, or to invite me to come down: not even little Adèle hadtapped at the door; not even Mrs. Fairfax had sought me. “Friendsalways forget those whom fortune forsakes,” I murmured, as I undrew thebolt and passed out. I stumbled over an obstacle: my head was stilldizzy, my sight was dim, and my limbs were feeble. I could not soonrecover myself. I fell, but not on to the ground: an outstretched armcaught me. I looked up—I was supported by Mr. Rochester, who sat in achair across my chamber threshold.“You come out at last,” he said. “Well, I have been waiting for youlong, and listening: yet not one movement have I heard, nor one sob:five minutes more of that death-like hush, and I should have forced thelock like a burglar. So you shun me?—you shut yourself up and grievealone! I would rather you had come and upbraided me with vehemence. Youare passionate: I expected a scene of some kind. I was prepared for thehot rain of tears; only I wanted them to be shed on my breast: now asenseless floor has received them, or your drenched handkerchief. But Ierr: you have not wept at all! I see a white cheek and a faded eye, butno trace of tears. I suppose, then, your heart has been weeping blood?”“Well, Jane! not a word of reproach? Nothing bitter—nothing poignant?Nothing to cut a feeling or sting a passion? You sit quietly where Ihave placed you, and regard me with a weary, passive look.“Jane, I never meant to wound you thus. If the man who had but onelittle ewe lamb that was dear to him as a daughter, that ate of hisbread and drank of his cup, and lay in his bosom, had by some mistakeslaughtered it at the shambles, he would not have rued his bloodyblunder more than I now rue mine. Will you ever forgive me?”Reader, I forgave him at the moment and on the spot. There was suchdeep remorse in his eye, such true pity in his tone, such manly energyin his manner; and besides, there was such unchanged love in his wholelook and mien—I forgave him all: yet not in words, not outwardly; onlyat my heart’s core.“You know I am a scoundrel, Jane?” ere long he inquiredwistfully—wondering, I suppose, at my continued silence and tameness,the result rather of weakness than of will.“Yes, sir.”“Then tell me so roundly and sharply—don’t spare me.”“I cannot: I am tired and sick. I want some water.” He heaved a sort ofshuddering sigh, and taking me in his arms, carried me downstairs. Atfirst I did not know to what room he had borne me; all was cloudy to myglazed sight: presently I felt the reviving warmth of a fire; for,summer as it was, I had become icy cold in my chamber. He put wine tomy lips; I tasted it and revived; then I ate something he offered me,and was soon myself. I was in the library—sitting in his chair—he wasquite near. “If I could go out of life now, without too sharp a pang,it would be well for me,” I thought; “then I should not have to makethe effort of cracking my heart-strings in rending them from among Mr.Rochester’s. I must leave him, it appears. I do not want to leave him—Icannot leave him.”“How are you now, Jane?”“Much better, sir; I shall be well soon.”“Taste the wine again, Jane.”I obeyed him; then he put the glass on the table, stood before me, andlooked at me attentively. Suddenly he turned away, with an inarticulateexclamation, full of passionate emotion of some kind; he walked fastthrough the room and came back; he stooped towards me as if to kiss me;but I remembered caresses were now forbidden. I turned my face away andput his aside.“What!—How is this?” he exclaimed hastily. “Oh, I know! you won’t kissthe husband of Bertha Mason? You consider my arms filled and myembraces appropriated?”“At any rate, there is neither room nor claim for me, sir.”“Why, Jane? I will spare you the trouble of much talking; I will answerfor you—Because I have a wife already, you would reply.—I guessrightly?”“Yes.”“If you think so, you must have a strange opinion of me; you mustregard me as a plotting profligate—a base and low rake who has beensimulating disinterested love in order to draw you into a snaredeliberately laid, and strip you of honour and rob you of self-respect.What do you say to that? I see you can say nothing: in the first place,you are faint still, and have enough to do to draw your breath; in thesecond place, you cannot yet accustom yourself to accuse and revile me,and besides, the flood-gates of tears are opened, and they would rushout if you spoke much; and you have no desire to expostulate, toupbraid, to make a scene: you are thinking how _to act_—_talking_ youconsider is of no use. I know you—I am on my guard.”“Sir, I do not wish to act against you,” I said; and my unsteady voicewarned me to curtail my sentence.“Not in _your_ sense of the word, but in _mine_ you are scheming todestroy me. You have as good as said that I am a married man—as amarried man you will shun me, keep out of my way: just now you haverefused to kiss me. You intend to make yourself a complete stranger tome: to live under this roof only as Adèle’s governess; if ever I say afriendly word to you, if ever a friendly feeling inclines you again tome, you will say,—‘That man had nearly made me his mistress: I must beice and rock to him;’ and ice and rock you will accordingly become.”I cleared and steadied my voice to reply: “All is changed about me,sir; I must change too—there is no doubt of that; and to avoidfluctuations of feeling, and continual combats with recollections andassociations, there is only one way—Adèle must have a new governess,sir.”“Oh, Adèle will go to school—I have settled that already; nor do I meanto torment you with the hideous associations and recollections ofThornfield Hall—this accursed place—this tent of Achan—this insolentvault, offering the ghastliness of living death to the light of theopen sky—this narrow stone hell, with its one real fiend, worse than alegion of such as we imagine. Jane, you shall not stay here, nor willI. I was wrong ever to bring you to Thornfield Hall, knowing as I didhow it was haunted. I charged them to conceal from you, before I eversaw you, all knowledge of the curse of the place; merely because Ifeared Adèle never would have a governess to stay if she knew with whatinmate she was housed, and my plans would not permit me to remove themaniac elsewhere—though I possess an old house, Ferndean Manor, evenmore retired and hidden than this, where I could have lodged her safelyenough, had not a scruple about the unhealthiness of the situation, inthe heart of a wood, made my conscience recoil from the arrangement.Probably those damp walls would soon have eased me of her charge: butto each villain his own vice; and mine is not a tendency to indirectassassination, even of what I most hate.“Concealing the mad-woman’s neighbourhood from you, however, wassomething like covering a child with a cloak and laying it down near aupas-tree: that demon’s vicinage is poisoned, and always was. But I’llshut up Thornfield Hall: I’ll nail up the front door and board thelower windows: I’ll give Mrs. Poole two hundred a year to live herewith _my wife_, as you term that fearful hag: Grace will do much formoney, and she shall have her son, the keeper at Grimsby Retreat, tobear her company and be at hand to give her aid in the paroxysms, when_my wife_ is prompted by her familiar to burn people in their beds atnight, to stab them, to bite their flesh from their bones, and so on—”“Sir,” I interrupted him, “you are inexorable for that unfortunatelady: you speak of her with hate—with vindictive antipathy. It iscruel—she cannot help being mad.”“Jane, my little darling (so I will call you, for so you are), youdon’t know what you are talking about; you misjudge me again: it is notbecause she is mad I hate her. If you were mad, do you think I shouldhate you?”“I do indeed, sir.”“Then you are mistaken, and you know nothing about me, and nothingabout the sort of love of which I am capable. Every atom of your fleshis as dear to me as my own: in pain and sickness it would still bedear. Your mind is my treasure, and if it were broken, it would be mytreasure still: if you raved, my arms should confine you, and not astrait waistcoat—your grasp, even in fury, would have a charm for me:if you flew at me as wildly as that woman did this morning, I shouldreceive you in an embrace, at least as fond as it would be restrictive.I should not shrink from you with disgust as I did from her: in yourquiet moments you should have no watcher and no nurse but me; and Icould hang over you with untiring tenderness, though you gave me nosmile in return; and never weary of gazing into your eyes, though theyhad no longer a ray of recognition for me.—But why do I follow thattrain of ideas? I was talking of removing you from Thornfield. All, youknow, is prepared for prompt departure: to-morrow you shall go. I onlyask you to endure one more night under this roof, Jane; and then,farewell to its miseries and terrors for ever! I have a place to repairto, which will be a secure sanctuary from hateful reminiscences, fromunwelcome intrusion—even from falsehood and slander.”“And take Adèle with you, sir,” I interrupted; “she will be a companionfor you.”“What do you mean, Jane? I told you I would send Adèle to school; andwhat do I want with a child for a companion, and not my own child,—aFrench dancer’s bastard? Why do you importune me about her! I say, whydo you assign Adèle to me for a companion?”“You spoke of a retirement, sir; and retirement and solitude are dull:too dull for you.”“Solitude! solitude!” he reiterated with irritation. “I see I must cometo an explanation. I don’t know what sphynx-like expression is formingin your countenance. _You_ are to share my solitude. Do youunderstand?”I shook my head: it required a degree of courage, excited as he wasbecoming, even to risk that mute sign of dissent. He had been walkingfast about the room, and he stopped, as if suddenly rooted to one spot.He looked at me long and hard: I turned my eyes from him, fixed them onthe fire, and tried to assume and maintain a quiet, collected aspect.“Now for the hitch in Jane’s character,” he said at last, speaking morecalmly than from his look I had expected him to speak. “The reel ofsilk has run smoothly enough so far; but I always knew there would comea knot and a puzzle: here it is. Now for vexation, and exasperation,and endless trouble! By God! I long to exert a fraction of Samson’sstrength, and break the entanglement like tow!”He recommenced his walk, but soon again stopped, and this time justbefore me.“Jane! will you hear reason?” (he stooped and approached his lips to myear); “because, if you won’t, I’ll try violence.” His voice was hoarse;his look that of a man who is just about to burst an insufferable bondand plunge headlong into wild license. I saw that in another moment,and with one impetus of frenzy more, I should be able to do nothingwith him. The present—the passing second of time—was all I had in whichto control and restrain him: a movement of repulsion, flight, fearwould have sealed my doom,—and his. But I was not afraid: not in theleast. I felt an inward power; a sense of influence, which supportedme. The crisis was perilous; but not without its charm: such as theIndian, perhaps, feels when he slips over the rapid in his canoe. Itook hold of his clenched hand, loosened the contorted fingers, andsaid to him, soothingly—“Sit down; I’ll talk to you as long as you like, and hear all you haveto say, whether reasonable or unreasonable.”He sat down: but he did not get leave to speak directly. I had beenstruggling with tears for some time: I had taken great pains to repressthem, because I knew he would not like to see me weep. Now, however, Iconsidered it well to let them flow as freely and as long as theyliked. If the flood annoyed him, so much the better. So I gave way andcried heartily.Soon I heard him earnestly entreating me to be composed. I said I couldnot while he was in such a passion.“But I am not angry, Jane: I only love you too well; and you hadsteeled your little pale face with such a resolute, frozen look, Icould not endure it. Hush, now, and wipe your eyes.”His softened voice announced that he was subdued; so I, in my turn,became calm. Now he made an effort to rest his head on my shoulder, butI would not permit it. Then he would draw me to him: no.“Jane! Jane!” he said, in such an accent of bitter sadness it thrilledalong every nerve I had; “you don’t love me, then? It was only mystation, and the rank of my wife, that you valued? Now that you thinkme disqualified to become your husband, you recoil from my touch as ifI were some toad or ape.”These words cut me: yet what could I do or I say? I ought probably tohave done or said nothing; but I was so tortured by a sense of remorseat thus hurting his feelings, I could not control the wish to drop balmwhere I had wounded.“I _do_ love you,” I said, “more than ever: but I must not show orindulge the feeling: and this is the last time I must express it.”“The last time, Jane! What! do you think you can live with me, and seeme daily, and yet, if you still love me, be always cold and distant?”“No, sir; that I am certain I could not; and therefore I see there isbut one way: but you will be furious if I mention it.”“Oh, mention it! If I storm, you have the art of weeping.”“Mr. Rochester, I must leave you.”“For how long, Jane? For a few minutes, while you smooth yourhair—which is somewhat dishevelled; and bathe your face—which looksfeverish?”“I must leave Adèle and Thornfield. I must part with you for my wholelife: I must begin a new existence among strange faces and strangescenes.”“Of course: I told you you should. I pass over the madness aboutparting from me. You mean you must become a part of me. As to the newexistence, it is all right: you shall yet be my wife: I am not married.You shall be Mrs. Rochester—both virtually and nominally. I shall keeponly to you so long as you and I live. You shall go to a place I havein the south of France: a whitewashed villa on the shores of theMediterranean. There you shall live a happy, and guarded, and mostinnocent life. Never fear that I wish to lure you into error—to makeyou my mistress. Why did you shake your head? Jane, you must bereasonable, or in truth I shall again become frantic.”His voice and hand quivered: his large nostrils dilated; his eyeblazed: still I dared to speak.“Sir, your wife is living: that is a fact acknowledged this morning byyourself. If I lived with you as you desire, I should then be yourmistress: to say otherwise is sophistical—is false.”“Jane, I am not a gentle-tempered man—you forget that: I am notlong-enduring; I am not cool and dispassionate. Out of pity to me andyourself, put your finger on my pulse, feel how it throbs, and—beware!”He bared his wrist, and offered it to me: the blood was forsaking hischeek and lips, they were growing livid; I was distressed on all hands.To agitate him thus deeply, by a resistance he so abhorred, was cruel:to yield was out of the question. I did what human beings doinstinctively when they are driven to utter extremity—looked for aid toone higher than man: the words “God help me!” burst involuntarily frommy lips.“I am a fool!” cried Mr. Rochester suddenly. “I keep telling her I amnot married, and do not explain to her why. I forget she knows nothingof the character of that woman, or of the circumstances attending myinfernal union with her. Oh, I am certain Jane will agree with me inopinion, when she knows all that I know! Just put your hand in mine,Janet—that I may have the evidence of touch as well as sight, to proveyou are near me—and I will in a few words show you the real state ofthe case. Can you listen to me?”“Yes, sir; for hours if you will.”“I ask only minutes. Jane, did you ever hear or know that I was not theeldest son of my house: that I had once a brother older than I?”“I remember Mrs. Fairfax told me so once.”“And did you ever hear that my father was an avaricious, grasping man?”“I have understood something to that effect.”“Well, Jane, being so, it was his resolution to keep the propertytogether; he could not bear the idea of dividing his estate and leavingme a fair portion: all, he resolved, should go to my brother, Rowland.Yet as little could he endure that a son of his should be a poor man. Imust be provided for by a wealthy marriage. He sought me a partnerbetimes. Mr. Mason, a West India planter and merchant, was his oldacquaintance. He was certain his possessions were real and vast: hemade inquiries. Mr. Mason, he found, had a son and daughter; and helearned from him that he could and would give the latter a fortune ofthirty thousand pounds: that sufficed. When I left college, I was sentout to Jamaica, to espouse a bride already courted for me. My fathersaid nothing about her money; but he told me Miss Mason was the boastof Spanish Town for her beauty: and this was no lie. I found her a finewoman, in the style of Blanche Ingram: tall, dark, and majestic. Herfamily wished to secure me because I was of a good race; and so didshe. They showed her to me in parties, splendidly dressed. I seldom sawher alone, and had very little private conversation with her. Sheflattered me, and lavishly displayed for my pleasure her charms andaccomplishments. All the men in her circle seemed to admire her andenvy me. I was dazzled, stimulated: my senses were excited; and beingignorant, raw, and inexperienced, I thought I loved her. There is nofolly so besotted that the idiotic rivalries of society, the prurience,the rashness, the blindness of youth, will not hurry a man to itscommission. Her relatives encouraged me; competitors piqued me; sheallured me: a marriage was achieved almost before I knew where I was.Oh, I have no respect for myself when I think of that act!—an agony ofinward contempt masters me. I never loved, I never esteemed, I did noteven know her. I was not sure of the existence of one virtue in hernature: I had marked neither modesty, nor benevolence, nor candour, norrefinement in her mind or manners—and, I married her:—gross,grovelling, mole-eyed blockhead that I was! With less sin I mighthave—But let me remember to whom I am speaking.“My bride’s mother I had never seen: I understood she was dead. Thehoneymoon over, I learned my mistake; she was only mad, and shut up ina lunatic asylum. There was a younger brother, too—a complete dumbidiot. The elder one, whom you have seen (and whom I cannot hate,whilst I abhor all his kindred, because he has some grains of affectionin his feeble mind, shown in the continued interest he takes in hiswretched sister, and also in a dog-like attachment he once bore me),will probably be in the same state one day. My father and my brotherRowland knew all this; but they thought only of the thirty thousandpounds, and joined in the plot against me.“These were vile discoveries; but except for the treachery ofconcealment, I should have made them no subject of reproach to my wife,even when I found her nature wholly alien to mine, her tastes obnoxiousto me, her cast of mind common, low, narrow, and singularly incapableof being led to anything higher, expanded to anything larger—when Ifound that I could not pass a single evening, nor even a single hour ofthe day with her in comfort; that kindly conversation could not besustained between us, because whatever topic I started, immediatelyreceived from her a turn at once coarse and trite, perverse andimbecile—when I perceived that I should never have a quiet or settledhousehold, because no servant would bear the continued outbreaks of herviolent and unreasonable temper, or the vexations of her absurd,contradictory, exacting orders—even then I restrained myself: Ieschewed upbraiding, I curtailed remonstrance; I tried to devour myrepentance and disgust in secret; I repressed the deep antipathy Ifelt.“Jane, I will not trouble you with abominable details: some strongwords shall express what I have to say. I lived with that womanupstairs four years, and before that time she had tried me indeed: hercharacter ripened and developed with frightful rapidity; her vicessprang up fast and rank: they were so strong, only cruelty could checkthem, and I would not use cruelty. What a pigmy intellect she had, andwhat giant propensities! How fearful were the curses those propensitiesentailed on me! Bertha Mason, the true daughter of an infamous mother,dragged me through all the hideous and degrading agonies which mustattend a man bound to a wife at once intemperate and unchaste.“My brother in the interval was dead, and at the end of the four yearsmy father died too. I was rich enough now—yet poor to hideousindigence: a nature the most gross, impure, depraved I ever saw, wasassociated with mine, and called by the law and by society a part ofme. And I could not rid myself of it by any legal proceedings: for thedoctors now discovered that _my wife_ was mad—her excesses hadprematurely developed the germs of insanity. Jane, you don’t like mynarrative; you look almost sick—shall I defer the rest to another day?”“No, sir, finish it now; I pity you—I do earnestly pity you.”“Pity, Jane, from some people is a noxious and insulting sort oftribute, which one is justified in hurling back in the teeth of thosewho offer it; but that is the sort of pity native to callous, selfishhearts; it is a hybrid, egotistical pain at hearing of woes, crossedwith ignorant contempt for those who have endured them. But that is notyour pity, Jane; it is not the feeling of which your whole face is fullat this moment—with which your eyes are now almost overflowing—withwhich your heart is heaving—with which your hand is trembling in mine.Your pity, my darling, is the suffering mother of love: its anguish isthe very natal pang of the divine passion. I accept it, Jane; let thedaughter have free advent—my arms wait to receive her.”“Now, sir, proceed; what did you do when you found she was mad?”“Jane, I approached the verge of despair; a remnant of self-respect wasall that intervened between me and the gulf. In the eyes of the world,I was doubtless covered with grimy dishonour; but I resolved to beclean in my own sight—and to the last I repudiated the contamination ofher crimes, and wrenched myself from connection with her mentaldefects. Still, society associated my name and person with hers; I yetsaw her and heard her daily: something of her breath (faugh!) mixedwith the air I breathed; and besides, I remembered I had once been herhusband—that recollection was then, and is now, inexpressibly odious tome; moreover, I knew that while she lived I could never be the husbandof another and better wife; and, though five years my senior (herfamily and her father had lied to me even in the particular of herage), she was likely to live as long as I, being as robust in frame asshe was infirm in mind. Thus, at the age of twenty-six, I was hopeless.“One night I had been awakened by her yells—(since the medical men hadpronounced her mad, she had, of course, been shut up)—it was a fieryWest Indian night; one of the description that frequently precede thehurricanes of those climates. Being unable to sleep in bed, I got upand opened the window. The air was like sulphur-steams—I could find norefreshment anywhere. Mosquitoes came buzzing in and hummed sullenlyround the room; the sea, which I could hear from thence, rumbled dulllike an earthquake—black clouds were casting up over it; the moon wassetting in the waves, broad and red, like a hot cannon-ball—she threwher last bloody glance over a world quivering with the ferment oftempest. I was physically influenced by the atmosphere and scene, andmy ears were filled with the curses the maniac still shrieked out;wherein she momentarily mingled my name with such a tone of demon-hate,with such language!—no professed harlot ever had a fouler vocabularythan she: though two rooms off, I heard every word—the thin partitionsof the West India house opposing but slight obstruction to her wolfishcries.“‘This life,’ said I at last, ‘is hell: this is the air—those are thesounds of the bottomless pit! I have a right to deliver myself from itif I can. The sufferings of this mortal state will leave me with theheavy flesh that now cumbers my soul. Of the fanatic’s burning eternityI have no fear: there is not a future state worse than this presentone—let me break away, and go home to God!’“I said this whilst I knelt down at, and unlocked a trunk whichcontained a brace of loaded pistols: I meant to shoot myself. I onlyentertained the intention for a moment; for, not being insane, thecrisis of exquisite and unalloyed despair, which had originated thewish and design of self-destruction, was past in a second.“A wind fresh from Europe blew over the ocean and rushed through theopen casement: the storm broke, streamed, thundered, blazed, and theair grew pure. I then framed and fixed a resolution. While I walkedunder the dripping orange-trees of my wet garden, and amongst itsdrenched pomegranates and pine-apples, and while the refulgent dawn ofthe tropics kindled round me—I reasoned thus, Jane—and now listen; forit was true Wisdom that consoled me in that hour, and showed me theright path to follow.“The sweet wind from Europe was still whispering in the refreshedleaves, and the Atlantic was thundering in glorious liberty; my heart,dried up and scorched for a long time, swelled to the tone, and filledwith living blood—my being longed for renewal—my soul thirsted for apure draught. I saw hope revive—and felt regeneration possible. From aflowery arch at the bottom of my garden I gazed over the sea—bluer thanthe sky: the old world was beyond; clear prospects opened thus:—“‘Go,’ said Hope, ‘and live again in Europe: there it is not known whata sullied name you bear, nor what a filthy burden is bound to you. Youmay take the maniac with you to England; confine her with dueattendance and precautions at Thornfield: then travel yourself to whatclime you will, and form what new tie you like. That woman, who has soabused your long-suffering, so sullied your name, so outraged yourhonour, so blighted your youth, is not your wife, nor are you herhusband. See that she is cared for as her condition demands, and youhave done all that God and humanity require of you. Let her identity,her connection with yourself, be buried in oblivion: you are bound toimpart them to no living being. Place her in safety and comfort:shelter her degradation with secrecy, and leave her.’“I acted precisely on this suggestion. My father and brother had notmade my marriage known to their acquaintance; because, in the veryfirst letter I wrote to apprise them of the union—having already begunto experience extreme disgust of its consequences, and, from the familycharacter and constitution, seeing a hideous future opening to me—Iadded an urgent charge to keep it secret: and very soon the infamousconduct of the wife my father had selected for me was such as to makehim blush to own her as his daughter-in-law. Far from desiring topublish the connection, he became as anxious to conceal it as myself.“To England, then, I conveyed her; a fearful voyage I had with such amonster in the vessel. Glad was I when I at last got her to Thornfield,and saw her safely lodged in that third-storey room, of whose secretinner cabinet she has now for ten years made a wild beast’s den—agoblin’s cell. I had some trouble in finding an attendant for her, asit was necessary to select one on whose fidelity dependence could beplaced; for her ravings would inevitably betray my secret: besides, shehad lucid intervals of days—sometimes weeks—which she filled up withabuse of me. At last I hired Grace Poole from the Grimbsy Retreat. Sheand the surgeon, Carter (who dressed Mason’s wounds that night he wasstabbed and worried), are the only two I have ever admitted to myconfidence. Mrs. Fairfax may indeed have suspected something, but shecould have gained no precise knowledge as to facts. Grace has, on thewhole, proved a good keeper; though, owing partly to a fault of herown, of which it appears nothing can cure her, and which is incident toher harassing profession, her vigilance has been more than once lulledand baffled. The lunatic is both cunning and malignant; she has neverfailed to take advantage of her guardian’s temporary lapses; once tosecrete the knife with which she stabbed her brother, and twice topossess herself of the key of her cell, and issue therefrom in thenight-time. On the first of these occasions, she perpetrated theattempt to burn me in my bed; on the second, she paid that ghastlyvisit to you. I thank Providence, who watched over you, that she thenspent her fury on your wedding apparel, which perhaps brought backvague reminiscences of her own bridal days: but on what might havehappened, I cannot endure to reflect. When I think of the thing whichflew at my throat this morning, hanging its black and scarlet visageover the nest of my dove, my blood curdles—”“And what, sir,” I asked, while he paused, “did you do when you hadsettled her here? Where did you go?”“What did I do, Jane? I transformed myself into a will-o’-the-wisp.Where did I go? I pursued wanderings as wild as those of theMarch-spirit. I sought the Continent, and went devious through all itslands. My fixed desire was to seek and find a good and intelligentwoman, whom I could love: a contrast to the fury I left at Thornfield—”“But you could not marry, sir.”“I had determined and was convinced that I could and ought. It was notmy original intention to deceive, as I have deceived you. I meant totell my tale plainly, and make my proposals openly: and it appeared tome so absolutely rational that I should be considered free to love andbe loved, I never doubted some woman might be found willing and able tounderstand my case and accept me, in spite of the curse with which Iwas burdened.”“Well, sir?”“When you are inquisitive, Jane, you always make me smile. You openyour eyes like an eager bird, and make every now and then a restlessmovement, as if answers in speech did not flow fast enough for you, andyou wanted to read the tablet of one’s heart. But before I go on, tellme what you mean by your ‘Well, sir?’ It is a small phrase veryfrequent with you; and which many a time has drawn me on and on throughinterminable talk: I don’t very well know why.”“I mean,—What next? How did you proceed? What came of such an event?”“Precisely! and what do you wish to know now?”“Whether you found any one you liked: whether you asked her to marryyou; and what she said.”“I can tell you whether I found any one I liked, and whether I askedher to marry me: but what she said is yet to be recorded in the book ofFate. For ten long years I roved about, living first in one capital,then another: sometimes in St. Petersburg; oftener in Paris;occasionally in Rome, Naples, and Florence. Provided with plenty ofmoney and the passport of an old name, I could choose my own society:no circles were closed against me. I sought my ideal of a woman amongstEnglish ladies, French countesses, Italian signoras, and Germangräfinnen. I could not find her. Sometimes, for a fleeting moment, Ithought I caught a glance, heard a tone, beheld a form, which announcedthe realisation of my dream: but I was presently undeceived. You arenot to suppose that I desired perfection, either of mind or person. Ilonged only for what suited me—for the antipodes of the Creole: and Ilonged vainly. Amongst them all I found not one whom, had I been everso free, I—warned as I was of the risks, the horrors, the loathings ofincongruous unions—would have asked to marry me. Disappointment made mereckless. I tried dissipation—never debauchery: that I hated, and hate.That was my Indian Messalina’s attribute: rooted disgust at it and herrestrained me much, even in pleasure. Any enjoyment that bordered onriot seemed to approach me to her and her vices, and I eschewed it.“Yet I could not live alone; so I tried the companionship ofmistresses. The first I chose was Céline Varens—another of those stepswhich make a man spurn himself when he recalls them. You already knowwhat she was, and how my liaison with her terminated. She had twosuccessors: an Italian, Giacinta, and a German, Clara; both consideredsingularly handsome. What was their beauty to me in a few weeks?Giacinta was unprincipled and violent: I tired of her in three months.Clara was honest and quiet; but heavy, mindless, and unimpressible: notone whit to my taste. I was glad to give her a sufficient sum to sether up in a good line of business, and so get decently rid of her. But,Jane, I see by your face you are not forming a very favourable opinionof me just now. You think me an unfeeling, loose-principled rake: don’tyou?”“I don’t like you so well as I have done sometimes, indeed, sir. Did itnot seem to you in the least wrong to live in that way, first with onemistress and then another? You talk of it as a mere matter of course.”“It was with me; and I did not like it. It was a grovelling fashion ofexistence: I should never like to return to it. Hiring a mistress isthe next worse thing to buying a slave: both are often by nature, andalways by position, inferior: and to live familiarly with inferiors isdegrading. I now hate the recollection of the time I passed withCéline, Giacinta, and Clara.”I felt the truth of these words; and I drew from them the certaininference, that if I were so far to forget myself and all the teachingthat had ever been instilled into me, as—under any pretext—with anyjustification—through any temptation—to become the successor of thesepoor girls, he would one day regard me with the same feeling which nowin his mind desecrated their memory. I did not give utterance to thisconviction: it was enough to feel it. I impressed it on my heart, thatit might remain there to serve me as aid in the time of trial.“Now, Jane, why don’t you say ‘Well, sir?’ I have not done. You arelooking grave. You disapprove of me still, I see. But let me come tothe point. Last January, rid of all mistresses—in a harsh, bitter frameof mind, the result of a useless, roving, lonely life—corroded withdisappointment, sourly disposed against all men, and especially againstall _woman_kind (for I began to regard the notion of an intellectual,faithful, loving woman as a mere dream), recalled by business, I cameback to England.“On a frosty winter afternoon, I rode in sight of Thornfield Hall.Abhorred spot! I expected no peace—no pleasure there. On a stile in HayLane I saw a quiet little figure sitting by itself. I passed it asnegligently as I did the pollard willow opposite to it: I had nopresentiment of what it would be to me; no inward warning that thearbitress of my life—my genius for good or evil—waited there in humbleguise. I did not know it, even when, on the occasion of Mesrour’saccident, it came up and gravely offered me help. Childish and slendercreature! It seemed as if a linnet had hopped to my foot and proposedto bear me on its tiny wing. I was surly; but the thing would not go:it stood by me with strange perseverance, and looked and spoke with asort of authority. I must be aided, and by that hand: and aided I was.“When once I had pressed the frail shoulder, something new—a fresh sapand sense—stole into my frame. It was well I had learnt that this elfmust return to me—that it belonged to my house down below—or I couldnot have felt it pass away from under my hand, and seen it vanishbehind the dim hedge, without singular regret. I heard you come homethat night, Jane, though probably you were not aware that I thought ofyou or watched for you. The next day I observed you—myself unseen—forhalf-an-hour, while you played with Adèle in the gallery. It was asnowy day, I recollect, and you could not go out of doors. I was in myroom; the door was ajar: I could both listen and watch. Adèle claimedyour outward attention for a while; yet I fancied your thoughts wereelsewhere: but you were very patient with her, my little Jane; youtalked to her and amused her a long time. When at last she left you,you lapsed at once into deep reverie: you betook yourself slowly topace the gallery. Now and then, in passing a casement, you glanced outat the thick-falling snow; you listened to the sobbing wind, and againyou paced gently on and dreamed. I think those day visions were notdark: there was a pleasurable illumination in your eye occasionally, asoft excitement in your aspect, which told of no bitter, bilious,hypochondriac brooding: your look revealed rather the sweet musings ofyouth when its spirit follows on willing wings the flight of Hope upand on to an ideal heaven. The voice of Mrs. Fairfax, speaking to aservant in the hall, wakened you: and how curiously you smiled to andat yourself, Janet! There was much sense in your smile: it was veryshrewd, and seemed to make light of your own abstraction. It seemed tosay—‘My fine visions are all very well, but I must not forget they areabsolutely unreal. I have a rosy sky and a green flowery Eden in mybrain; but without, I am perfectly aware, lies at my feet a rough tractto travel, and around me gather black tempests to encounter.’ You randownstairs and demanded of Mrs. Fairfax some occupation: the weeklyhouse accounts to make up, or something of that sort, I think it was. Iwas vexed with you for getting out of my sight.“Impatiently I waited for evening, when I might summon you to mypresence. An unusual—to me—a perfectly new character I suspected wasyours: I desired to search it deeper and know it better. You enteredthe room with a look and air at once shy and independent: you werequaintly dressed—much as you are now. I made you talk: ere long I foundyou full of strange contrasts. Your garb and manner were restricted byrule; your air was often diffident, and altogether that of one refinedby nature, but absolutely unused to society, and a good deal afraid ofmaking herself disadvantageously conspicuous by some solecism orblunder; yet when addressed, you lifted a keen, a daring, and a glowingeye to your interlocutor’s face: there was penetration and power ineach glance you gave; when plied by close questions, you found readyand round answers. Very soon you seemed to get used to me: I believeyou felt the existence of sympathy between you and your grim and crossmaster, Jane; for it was astonishing to see how quickly a certainpleasant ease tranquillised your manner: snarl as I would, you showedno surprise, fear, annoyance, or displeasure at my moroseness; youwatched me, and now and then smiled at me with a simple yet sagaciousgrace I cannot describe. I was at once content and stimulated with whatI saw: I liked what I had seen, and wished to see more. Yet, for a longtime, I treated you distantly, and sought your company rarely. I was anintellectual epicure, and wished to prolong the gratification of makingthis novel and piquant acquaintance: besides, I was for a whiletroubled with a haunting fear that if I handled the flower freely itsbloom would fade—the sweet charm of freshness would leave it. I did notthen know that it was no transitory blossom, but rather the radiantresemblance of one, cut in an indestructible gem. Moreover, I wished tosee whether you would seek me if I shunned you—but you did not; youkept in the schoolroom as still as your own desk and easel; if bychance I met you, you passed me as soon, and with as little token ofrecognition, as was consistent with respect. Your habitual expressionin those days, Jane, was a thoughtful look; not despondent, for youwere not sickly; but not buoyant, for you had little hope, and noactual pleasure. I wondered what you thought of me, or if you everthought of me, and resolved to find this out.“I resumed my notice of you. There was something glad in your glance,and genial in your manner, when you conversed: I saw you had a socialheart; it was the silent schoolroom—it was the tedium of your life—thatmade you mournful. I permitted myself the delight of being kind to you;kindness stirred emotion soon: your face became soft in expression,your tones gentle; I liked my name pronounced by your lips in agrateful happy accent. I used to enjoy a chance meeting with you, Jane,at this time: there was a curious hesitation in your manner: youglanced at me with a slight trouble—a hovering doubt: you did not knowwhat my caprice might be—whether I was going to play the master and bestern, or the friend and be benignant. I was now too fond of you oftento simulate the first whim; and, when I stretched my hand outcordially, such bloom and light and bliss rose to your young, wistfulfeatures, I had much ado often to avoid straining you then and there tomy heart.”“Don’t talk any more of those days, sir,” I interrupted, furtivelydashing away some tears from my eyes; his language was torture to me;for I knew what I must do—and do soon—and all these reminiscences, andthese revelations of his feelings only made my work more difficult.“No, Jane,” he returned: “what necessity is there to dwell on the Past,when the Present is so much surer—the Future so much brighter?”I shuddered to hear the infatuated assertion.“You see now how the case stands—do you not?” he continued. “After ayouth and manhood passed half in unutterable misery and half in drearysolitude, I have for the first time found what I can truly love—I havefound _you_. You are my sympathy—my better self—my good angel. I ambound to you with a strong attachment. I think you good, gifted,lovely: a fervent, a solemn passion is conceived in my heart; it leansto you, draws you to my centre and spring of life, wraps my existenceabout you, and, kindling in pure, powerful flame, fuses you and me inone.“It was because I felt and knew this, that I resolved to marry you. Totell me that I had already a wife is empty mockery: you know now that Ihad but a hideous demon. I was wrong to attempt to deceive you; but Ifeared a stubbornness that exists in your character. I feared earlyinstilled prejudice: I wanted to have you safe before hazardingconfidences. This was cowardly: I should have appealed to yournobleness and magnanimity at first, as I do now—opened to you plainlymy life of agony—described to you my hunger and thirst after a higherand worthier existence—shown to you, not my _resolution_ (that word isweak), but my resistless _bent_ to love faithfully and well, where I amfaithfully and well loved in return. Then I should have asked you toaccept my pledge of fidelity and to give me yours. Jane—give it menow.”A pause.“Why are you silent, Jane?”I was experiencing an ordeal: a hand of fiery iron grasped my vitals.Terrible moment: full of struggle, blackness, burning! Not a humanbeing that ever lived could wish to be loved better than I was loved;and him who thus loved me I absolutely worshipped: and I must renouncelove and idol. One drear word comprised my intolerable duty—“Depart!”“Jane, you understand what I want of you? Just this promise—‘I will beyours, Mr. Rochester.’”“Mr. Rochester, I will _not_ be yours.”Another long silence.“Jane!” recommenced he, with a gentleness that broke me down withgrief, and turned me stone-cold with ominous terror—for this stillvoice was the pant of a lion rising—“Jane, do you mean to go one way inthe world, and to let me go another?”“I do.”“Jane” (bending towards and embracing me), “do you mean it now?”“I do.”“And now?” softly kissing my forehead and cheek.“I do,” extricating myself from restraint rapidly and completely.“Oh, Jane, this is bitter! This—this is wicked. It would not be wickedto love me.”“It would to obey you.”A wild look raised his brows—crossed his features: he rose; but heforebore yet. I laid my hand on the back of a chair for support: Ishook, I feared—but I resolved.“One instant, Jane. Give one glance to my horrible life when you aregone. All happiness will be torn away with you. What then is left? Fora wife I have but the maniac upstairs: as well might you refer me tosome corpse in yonder churchyard. What shall I do, Jane? Where turn fora companion and for some hope?”“Do as I do: trust in God and yourself. Believe in heaven. Hope to meetagain there.”“Then you will not yield?”“No.”“Then you condemn me to live wretched and to die accursed?” His voicerose.“I advise you to live sinless, and I wish you to die tranquil.”“Then you snatch love and innocence from me? You fling me back on lustfor a passion—vice for an occupation?”“Mr. Rochester, I no more assign this fate to you than I grasp at itfor myself. We were born to strive and endure—you as well as I: do so.You will forget me before I forget you.”“You make me a liar by such language: you sully my honour. I declared Icould not change: you tell me to my face I shall change soon. And whata distortion in your judgment, what a perversity in your ideas, isproved by your conduct! Is it better to drive a fellow-creature todespair than to transgress a mere human law, no man being injured bythe breach? for you have neither relatives nor acquaintances whom youneed fear to offend by living with me?”This was true: and while he spoke my very conscience and reason turnedtraitors against me, and charged me with crime in resisting him. Theyspoke almost as loud as Feeling: and that clamoured wildly. “Oh,comply!” it said. “Think of his misery; think of his danger—look at hisstate when left alone; remember his headlong nature; consider therecklessness following on despair—soothe him; save him; love him; tellhim you love him and will be his. Who in the world cares for _you_? orwho will be injured by what you do?”Still indomitable was the reply—“_I_ care for myself. The moresolitary, the more friendless, the more unsustained I am, the more Iwill respect myself. I will keep the law given by God; sanctioned byman. I will hold to the principles received by me when I was sane, andnot mad—as I am now. Laws and principles are not for the times whenthere is no temptation: they are for such moments as this, when bodyand soul rise in mutiny against their rigour; stringent are they;inviolate they shall be. If at my individual convenience I might breakthem, what would be their worth? They have a worth—so I have alwaysbelieved; and if I cannot believe it now, it is because I aminsane—quite insane: with my veins running fire, and my heart beatingfaster than I can count its throbs. Preconceived opinions, foregonedeterminations, are all I have at this hour to stand by: there I plantmy foot.”I did. Mr. Rochester, reading my countenance, saw I had done so. Hisfury was wrought to the highest: he must yield to it for a moment,whatever followed; he crossed the floor and seized my arm and graspedmy waist. He seemed to devour me with his flaming glance: physically, Ifelt, at the moment, powerless as stubble exposed to the draught andglow of a furnace: mentally, I still possessed my soul, and with it thecertainty of ultimate safety. The soul, fortunately, has aninterpreter—often an unconscious, but still a truthful interpreter—inthe eye. My eye rose to his; and while I looked in his fierce face Igave an involuntary sigh; his gripe was painful, and my over-taxedstrength almost exhausted.“Never,” said he, as he ground his teeth, “never was anything at onceso frail and so indomitable. A mere reed she feels in my hand!” (And heshook me with the force of his hold.) “I could bend her with my fingerand thumb: and what good would it do if I bent, if I uptore, if Icrushed her? Consider that eye: consider the resolute, wild, free thinglooking out of it, defying me, with more than courage—with a sterntriumph. Whatever I do with its cage, I cannot get at it—the savage,beautiful creature! If I tear, if I rend the slight prison, my outragewill only let the captive loose. Conqueror I might be of the house; butthe inmate would escape to heaven before I could call myself possessorof its clay dwelling-place. And it is you, spirit—with will and energy,and virtue and purity—that I want: not alone your brittle frame. Ofyourself you could come with soft flight and nestle against my heart,if you would: seized against your will, you will elude the grasp likean essence—you will vanish ere I inhale your fragrance. Oh! come, Jane,come!”As he said this, he released me from his clutch, and only looked at me.The look was far worse to resist than the frantic strain: only anidiot, however, would have succumbed now. I had dared and baffled hisfury; I must elude his sorrow: I retired to the door.“You are going, Jane?”“I am going, sir.”“You are leaving me?”“Yes.”“You will not come? You will not be my comforter, my rescuer? My deeplove, my wild woe, my frantic prayer, are all nothing to you?”What unutterable pathos was in his voice! How hard it was to reiteratefirmly, “I am going.”“Jane!”“Mr. Rochester!”“Withdraw, then,—I consent; but remember, you leave me here in anguish.Go up to your own room; think over all I have said, and, Jane, cast aglance on my sufferings—think of me.”He turned away; he threw himself on his face on the sofa. “Oh, Jane! myhope—my love—my life!” broke in anguish from his lips. Then came adeep, strong sob.I had already gained the door; but, reader, I walked back—walked backas determinedly as I had retreated. I knelt down by him; I turned hisface from the cushion to me; I kissed his cheek; I smoothed his hairwith my hand.“God bless you, my dear master!” I said. “God keep you from harm andwrong—direct you, solace you—reward you well for your past kindness tome.”“Little Jane’s love would have been my best reward,” he answered;“without it, my heart is broken. But Jane will give me her love:yes—nobly, generously.”Up the blood rushed to his face; forth flashed the fire from his eyes;erect he sprang; he held his arms out; but I evaded the embrace, and atonce quitted the room.“Farewell!” was the cry of my heart as I left him. Despair added,“Farewell for ever!”That night I never thought to sleep; but a slumber fell on me as soonas I lay down in bed. I was transported in thought to the scenes ofchildhood: I dreamt I lay in the red-room at Gateshead; that the nightwas dark, and my mind impressed with strange fears. The light that longago had struck me into syncope, recalled in this vision, seemedglidingly to mount the wall, and tremblingly to pause in the centre ofthe obscured ceiling. I lifted up my head to look: the roof resolved toclouds, high and dim; the gleam was such as the moon imparts to vapoursshe is about to sever. I watched her come—watched with the strangestanticipation; as though some word of doom were to be written on herdisk. She broke forth as never moon yet burst from cloud: a hand firstpenetrated the sable folds and waved them away; then, not a moon, but awhite human form shone in the azure, inclining a glorious browearthward. It gazed and gazed on me. It spoke to my spirit:immeasurably distant was the tone, yet so near, it whispered in myheart—“My daughter, flee temptation.”“Mother, I will.”So I answered after I had waked from the trance-like dream. It was yetnight, but July nights are short: soon after midnight, dawn comes. “Itcannot be too early to commence the task I have to fulfil,” thought I.I rose: I was dressed; for I had taken off nothing but my shoes. I knewwhere to find in my drawers some linen, a locket, a ring. In seekingthese articles, I encountered the beads of a pearl necklace Mr.Rochester had forced me to accept a few days ago. I left that; it wasnot mine: it was the visionary bride’s who had melted in air. The otherarticles I made up in a parcel; my purse, containing twenty shillings(it was all I had), I put in my pocket: I tied on my straw bonnet,pinned my shawl, took the parcel and my slippers, which I would not puton yet, and stole from my room.“Farewell, kind Mrs. Fairfax!” I whispered, as I glided past her door.“Farewell, my darling Adèle!” I said, as I glanced towards the nursery.No thought could be admitted of entering to embrace her. I had todeceive a fine ear: for aught I knew it might now be listening.I would have got past Mr. Rochester’s chamber without a pause; but myheart momentarily stopping its beat at that threshold, my foot wasforced to stop also. No sleep was there: the inmate was walkingrestlessly from wall to wall; and again and again he sighed while Ilistened. There was a heaven—a temporary heaven—in this room for me, ifI chose: I had but to go in and to say—“Mr. Rochester, I will love you and live with you through life tilldeath,” and a fount of rapture would spring to my lips. I thought ofthis.That kind master, who could not sleep now, was waiting with impatiencefor day. He would send for me in the morning; I should be gone. Hewould have me sought for: vainly. He would feel himself forsaken; hislove rejected: he would suffer; perhaps grow desperate. I thought ofthis too. My hand moved towards the lock: I caught it back, and glidedon.Drearily I wound my way downstairs: I knew what I had to do, and I didit mechanically. I sought the key of the side-door in the kitchen; Isought, too, a phial of oil and a feather; I oiled the key and thelock. I got some water, I got some bread: for perhaps I should have towalk far; and my strength, sorely shaken of late, must not break down.All this I did without one sound. I opened the door, passed out, shutit softly. Dim dawn glimmered in the yard. The great gates were closedand locked; but a wicket in one of them was only latched. Through thatI departed: it, too, I shut; and now I was out of Thornfield.A mile off, beyond the fields, lay a road which stretched in thecontrary direction to Millcote; a road I had never travelled, but oftennoticed, and wondered where it led: thither I bent my steps. Noreflection was to be allowed now: not one glance was to be cast back;not even one forward. Not one thought was to be given either to thepast or the future. The first was a page so heavenly sweet—so deadlysad—that to read one line of it would dissolve my courage and breakdown my energy. The last was an awful blank: something like the worldwhen the deluge was gone by.I skirted fields, and hedges, and lanes till after sunrise. I believeit was a lovely summer morning: I know my shoes, which I had put onwhen I left the house, were soon wet with dew. But I looked neither torising sun, nor smiling sky, nor wakening nature. He who is taken outto pass through a fair scene to the scaffold, thinks not of the flowersthat smile on his road, but of the block and axe-edge; of thedisseverment of bone and vein; of the grave gaping at the end: and Ithought of drear flight and homeless wandering—and oh! with agony Ithought of what I left. I could not help it. I thought of him now—inhis room—watching the sunrise; hoping I should soon come to say I wouldstay with him and be his. I longed to be his; I panted to return: itwas not too late; I could yet spare him the bitter pang of bereavement.As yet my flight, I was sure, was undiscovered. I could go back and behis comforter—his pride; his redeemer from misery, perhaps from ruin.Oh, that fear of his self-abandonment—far worse than my abandonment—howit goaded me! It was a barbed arrow-head in my breast; it tore me whenI tried to extract it; it sickened me when remembrance thrust itfarther in. Birds began singing in brake and copse: birds were faithfulto their mates; birds were emblems of love. What was I? In the midst ofmy pain of heart and frantic effort of principle, I abhorred myself. Ihad no solace from self-approbation: none even from self-respect. I hadinjured—wounded—left my master. I was hateful in my own eyes. Still Icould not turn, nor retrace one step. God must have led me on. As to myown will or conscience, impassioned grief had trampled one and stifledthe other. I was weeping wildly as I walked along my solitary way:fast, fast I went like one delirious. A weakness, beginning inwardly,extending to the limbs, seized me, and I fell: I lay on the ground someminutes, pressing my face to the wet turf. I had some fear—or hope—thathere I should die: but I was soon up; crawling forwards on my hands andknees, and then again raised to my feet—as eager and as determined asever to reach the road.When I got there, I was forced to sit to rest me under the hedge; andwhile I sat, I heard wheels, and saw a coach come on. I stood up andlifted my hand; it stopped. I asked where it was going: the drivernamed a place a long way off, and where I was sure Mr. Rochester had noconnections. I asked for what sum he would take me there; he saidthirty shillings; I answered I had but twenty; well, he would try tomake it do. He further gave me leave to get into the inside, as thevehicle was empty: I entered, was shut in, and it rolled on its way.Gentle reader, may you never feel what I then felt! May your eyes nevershed such stormy, scalding, heart-wrung tears as poured from mine. Mayyou never appeal to Heaven in prayers so hopeless and so agonised as inthat hour left my lips; for never may you, like me, dread to be theinstrument of evil to what you wholly love.CHAPTER XXVIIITwo days are passed. It is a summer evening; the coachman has set medown at a place called Whitcross; he could take me no farther for thesum I had given, and I was not possessed of another shilling in theworld. The coach is a mile off by this time; I am alone. At this momentI discover that I forgot to take my parcel out of the pocket of thecoach, where I had placed it for safety; there it remains, there itmust remain; and now, I am absolutely destitute.Whitcross is no town, nor even a hamlet; it is but a stone pillar setup where four roads meet: whitewashed, I suppose, to be more obvious ata distance and in darkness. Four arms spring from its summit: thenearest town to which these point is, according to the inscription,distant ten miles; the farthest, above twenty. From the well-knownnames of these towns I learn in what county I have lighted; anorth-midland shire, dusk with moorland, ridged with mountain: this Isee. There are great moors behind and on each hand of me; there arewaves of mountains far beyond that deep valley at my feet. Thepopulation here must be thin, and I see no passengers on these roads:they stretch out east, west, north, and south—white, broad, lonely;they are all cut in the moor, and the heather grows deep and wild totheir very verge. Yet a chance traveller might pass by; and I wish noeye to see me now: strangers would wonder what I am doing, lingeringhere at the sign-post, evidently objectless and lost. I might bequestioned: I could give no answer but what would sound incredible andexcite suspicion. Not a tie holds me to human society at thismoment—not a charm or hope calls me where my fellow-creatures are—nonethat saw me would have a kind thought or a good wish for me. I have norelative but the universal mother, Nature: I will seek her breast andask repose.I struck straight into the heath; I held on to a hollow I saw deeplyfurrowing the brown moorside; I waded knee-deep in its dark growth; Iturned with its turnings, and finding a moss-blackened granite crag ina hidden angle, I sat down under it. High banks of moor were about me;the crag protected my head: the sky was over that.Some time passed before I felt tranquil even here: I had a vague dreadthat wild cattle might be near, or that some sportsman or poacher mightdiscover me. If a gust of wind swept the waste, I looked up, fearing itwas the rush of a bull; if a plover whistled, I imagined it a man.Finding my apprehensions unfounded, however, and calmed by the deepsilence that reigned as evening declined at nightfall, I tookconfidence. As yet I had not thought; I had only listened, watched,dreaded; now I regained the faculty of reflection.What was I to do? Where to go? Oh, intolerable questions, when I coulddo nothing and go nowhere!—when a long way must yet be measured by myweary, trembling limbs before I could reach human habitation—when coldcharity must be entreated before I could get a lodging: reluctantsympathy importuned, almost certain repulse incurred, before my talecould be listened to, or one of my wants relieved!I touched the heath: it was dry, and yet warm with the heat of thesummer day. I looked at the sky; it was pure: a kindly star twinkledjust above the chasm ridge. The dew fell, but with propitious softness;no breeze whispered. Nature seemed to me benign and good; I thought sheloved me, outcast as I was; and I, who from man could anticipate onlymistrust, rejection, insult, clung to her with filial fondness.To-night, at least, I would be her guest, as I was her child: my motherwould lodge me without money and without price. I had one morsel ofbread yet: the remnant of a roll I had bought in a town we passedthrough at noon with a stray penny—my last coin. I saw ripe bilberriesgleaming here and there, like jet beads in the heath: I gathered ahandful and ate them with the bread. My hunger, sharp before, was, ifnot satisfied, appeased by this hermit’s meal. I said my eveningprayers at its conclusion, and then chose my couch.I said my evening prayersBeside the crag the heath was very deep: when I lay down my feet wereburied in it; rising high on each side, it left only a narrow space forthe night-air to invade. I folded my shawl double, and spread it overme for a coverlet; a low, mossy swell was my pillow. Thus lodged, I wasnot, at least at the commencement of the night, cold.My rest might have been blissful enough, only a sad heart broke it. Itplained of its gaping wounds, its inward bleeding, its riven chords. Ittrembled for Mr. Rochester and his doom; it bemoaned him with bitterpity; it demanded him with ceaseless longing; and, impotent as a birdwith both wings broken, it still quivered its shattered pinions in vainattempts to seek him.Worn out with this torture of thought, I rose to my knees. Night wascome, and her planets were risen: a safe, still night: too serene forthe companionship of fear. We know that God is everywhere; butcertainly we feel His presence most when His works are on the grandestscale spread before us; and it is in the unclouded night-sky, where Hisworlds wheel their silent course, that we read clearest His infinitude,His omnipotence, His omnipresence. I had risen to my knees to pray forMr. Rochester. Looking up, I, with tear-dimmed eyes, saw the mightyMilky-way. Remembering what it was—what countless systems there sweptspace like a soft trace of light—I felt the might and strength of God.Sure was I of His efficiency to save what He had made: convinced I grewthat neither earth should perish, nor one of the souls it treasured. Iturned my prayer to thanksgiving: the Source of Life was also theSaviour of spirits. Mr. Rochester was safe: he was God’s, and by Godwould he be guarded. I again nestled to the breast of the hill; and erelong in sleep forgot sorrow.But next day, Want came to me pale and bare. Long after the littlebirds had left their nests; long after bees had come in the sweet primeof day to gather the heath honey before the dew was dried—when the longmorning shadows were curtailed, and the sun filled earth and sky—I gotup, and I looked round me.What a still, hot, perfect day! What a golden desert this spreadingmoor! Everywhere sunshine. I wished I could live in it and on it. I sawa lizard run over the crag; I saw a bee busy among the sweetbilberries. I would fain at the moment have become bee or lizard, thatI might have found fitting nutriment, permanent shelter here. But I wasa human being, and had a human being’s wants: I must not linger wherethere was nothing to supply them. I rose; I looked back at the bed Ihad left. Hopeless of the future, I wished but this—that my Maker hadthat night thought good to require my soul of me while I slept; andthat this weary frame, absolved by death from further conflict withfate, had now but to decay quietly, and mingle in peace with the soilof this wilderness. Life, however, was yet in my possession, with allits requirements, and pains, and responsibilities. The burden must becarried; the want provided for; the suffering endured; theresponsibility fulfilled. I set out.Whitcross regained, I followed a road which led from the sun, nowfervent and high. By no other circumstance had I will to decide mychoice. I walked a long time, and when I thought I had nearly doneenough, and might conscientiously yield to the fatigue that almostoverpowered me—might relax this forced action, and, sitting down on astone I saw near, submit resistlessly to the apathy that clogged heartand limb—I heard a bell chime—a church bell.I turned in the direction of the sound, and there, amongst the romantichills, whose changes and aspect I had ceased to note an hour ago, I sawa hamlet and a spire. All the valley at my right hand was full ofpasture-fields, and cornfields, and wood; and a glittering stream ranzig-zag through the varied shades of green, the mellowing grain, thesombre woodland, the clear and sunny lea. Recalled by the rumbling ofwheels to the road before me, I saw a heavily-laden waggon labouring upthe hill, and not far beyond were two cows and their drover. Human lifeand human labour were near. I must struggle on: strive to live and bendto toil like the rest.About two o’clock P.M. I entered the village. At the bottom of its onestreet there was a little shop with some cakes of bread in the window.I coveted a cake of bread. With that refreshment I could perhaps regaina degree of energy: without it, it would be difficult to proceed. Thewish to have some strength and some vigour returned to me as soon as Iwas amongst my fellow-beings. I felt it would be degrading to faintwith hunger on the causeway of a hamlet. Had I nothing about me I couldoffer in exchange for one of these rolls? I considered. I had a smallsilk handkerchief tied round my throat; I had my gloves. I could hardlytell how men and women in extremities of destitution proceeded. I didnot know whether either of these articles would be accepted: probablythey would not; but I must try.I entered the shop: a woman was there. Seeing a respectably-dressedperson, a lady as she supposed, she came forward with civility. Howcould she serve me? I was seized with shame: my tongue would not utterthe request I had prepared. I dared not offer her the half-worn gloves,the creased handkerchief: besides, I felt it would be absurd. I onlybegged permission to sit down a moment, as I was tired. Disappointed inthe expectation of a customer, she coolly acceded to my request. Shepointed to a seat; I sank into it. I felt sorely urged to weep; butconscious how unseasonable such a manifestation would be, I restrainedit. Soon I asked her “if there were any dressmaker or plain-workwomanin the village?”“Yes; two or three. Quite as many as there was employment for.”I reflected. I was driven to the point now. I was brought face to facewith Necessity. I stood in the position of one without a resource,without a friend, without a coin. I must do something. What? I mustapply somewhere. Where?“Did she know of any place in the neighbourhood where a servant waswanted?”“Nay; she couldn’t say.”“What was the chief trade in this place? What did most of the peopledo?”“Some were farm labourers; a good deal worked at Mr. Oliver’sneedle-factory, and at the foundry.”“Did Mr. Oliver employ women?”“Nay; it was men’s work.”“And what do the women do?”“I knawn’t,” was the answer. “Some does one thing, and some another.Poor folk mun get on as they can.”She seemed to be tired of my questions: and, indeed, what claim had Ito importune her? A neighbour or two came in; my chair was evidentlywanted. I took leave.I passed up the street, looking as I went at all the houses to theright hand and to the left; but I could discover no pretext, nor see aninducement to enter any. I rambled round the hamlet, going sometimes toa little distance and returning again, for an hour or more. Muchexhausted, and suffering greatly now for want of food, I turned asideinto a lane and sat down under the hedge. Ere many minutes had elapsed,I was again on my feet, however, and again searching something—aresource, or at least an informant. A pretty little house stood at thetop of the lane, with a garden before it, exquisitely neat andbrilliantly blooming. I stopped at it. What business had I to approachthe white door or touch the glittering knocker? In what way could itpossibly be the interest of the inhabitants of that dwelling to serveme? Yet I drew near and knocked. A mild-looking, cleanly-attired youngwoman opened the door. In such a voice as might be expected from ahopeless heart and fainting frame—a voice wretchedly low andfaltering—I asked if a servant was wanted here?“No,” said she; “we do not keep a servant.”“Can you tell me where I could get employment of any kind?” Icontinued. “I am a stranger, without acquaintance in this place. I wantsome work: no matter what.”But it was not her business to think for me, or to seek a place for me:besides, in her eyes, how doubtful must have appeared my character,position, tale. She shook her head, she “was sorry she could give me noinformation,” and the white door closed, quite gently and civilly: butit shut me out. If she had held it open a little longer, I believe Ishould have begged a piece of bread; for I was now brought low.I could not bear to return to the sordid village, where, besides, noprospect of aid was visible. I should have longed rather to deviate toa wood I saw not far off, which appeared in its thick shade to offerinviting shelter; but I was so sick, so weak, so gnawed with nature’scravings, instinct kept me roaming round abodes where there was achance of food. Solitude would be no solitude—rest no rest—while thevulture, hunger, thus sank beak and talons in my side.I drew near houses; I left them, and came back again, and again Iwandered away: always repelled by the consciousness of having no claimto ask—no right to expect interest in my isolated lot. Meantime, theafternoon advanced, while I thus wandered about like a lost andstarving dog. In crossing a field, I saw the church spire before me: Ihastened towards it. Near the churchyard, and in the middle of agarden, stood a well-built though small house, which I had no doubt wasthe parsonage. I remembered that strangers who arrive at a place wherethey have no friends, and who want employment, sometimes apply to theclergyman for introduction and aid. It is the clergyman’s function tohelp—at least with advice—those who wished to help themselves. I seemedto have something like a right to seek counsel here. Renewing then mycourage, and gathering my feeble remains of strength, I pushed on. Ireached the house, and knocked at the kitchen-door. An old womanopened: I asked was this the parsonage?“Yes.”“Was the clergyman in?”“No.”“Would he be in soon?”“No, he was gone from home.”“To a distance?”“Not so far—happen three mile. He had been called away by the suddendeath of his father: he was at Marsh End now, and would very likelystay there a fortnight longer.”“Was there any lady of the house?”“Nay, there was naught but her, and she was housekeeper;” and of her,reader, I could not bear to ask the relief for want of which I wassinking; I could not yet beg; and again I crawled away.Once more I took off my handkerchief—once more I thought of the cakesof bread in the little shop. Oh, for but a crust! for but one mouthfulto allay the pang of famine! Instinctively I turned my face again tothe village; I found the shop again, and I went in; and though otherswere there besides the woman I ventured the request—“Would she give mea roll for this handkerchief?”She looked at me with evident suspicion: “Nay, she never sold stuff i’that way.”Almost desperate, I asked for half a cake; she again refused. “Howcould she tell where I had got the handkerchief?” she said.“Would she take my gloves?”“No! what could she do with them?”Reader, it is not pleasant to dwell on these details. Some say there isenjoyment in looking back to painful experience past; but at this day Ican scarcely bear to review the times to which I allude: the moraldegradation, blent with the physical suffering, form too distressing arecollection ever to be willingly dwelt on. I blamed none of those whorepulsed me. I felt it was what was to be expected, and what could notbe helped: an ordinary beggar is frequently an object of suspicion; awell-dressed beggar inevitably so. To be sure, what I begged wasemployment; but whose business was it to provide me with employment?Not, certainly, that of persons who saw me then for the first time, andwho knew nothing about my character. And as to the woman who would nottake my handkerchief in exchange for her bread, why, she was right, ifthe offer appeared to her sinister or the exchange unprofitable. Let mecondense now. I am sick of the subject.A little before dark I passed a farm-house, at the open door of whichthe farmer was sitting, eating his supper of bread and cheese. Istopped and said—“Will you give me a piece of bread? for I am very hungry.” He cast onme a glance of surprise; but without answering, he cut a thick slicefrom his loaf, and gave it to me. I imagine he did not think I was abeggar, but only an eccentric sort of lady, who had taken a fancy tohis brown loaf. As soon as I was out of sight of his house, I sat downand ate it.I could not hope to get a lodging under a roof, and sought it in thewood I have before alluded to. But my night was wretched, my restbroken: the ground was damp, the air cold: besides, intruders passednear me more than once, and I had again and again to change myquarters: no sense of safety or tranquillity befriended me. Towardsmorning it rained; the whole of the following day was wet. Do not askme, reader, to give a minute account of that day; as before, I soughtwork; as before, I was repulsed; as before, I starved; but once didfood pass my lips. At the door of a cottage I saw a little girl aboutto throw a mess of cold porridge into a pig trough. “Will you give methat?” I asked.“Will you give me that?” I askedShe stared at me. “Mother!” she exclaimed, “there is a woman wants meto give her these porridge.”“Well lass,” replied a voice within, “give it her if she’s a beggar. T’pig doesn’t want it.”The girl emptied the stiffened mould into my hand, and I devoured itravenously.As the wet twilight deepened, I stopped in a solitary bridle-path,which I had been pursuing an hour or more.“My strength is quite failing me,” I said in a soliloquy. “I feel Icannot go much farther. Shall I be an outcast again this night? Whilethe rain descends so, must I lay my head on the cold, drenched ground?I fear I cannot do otherwise: for who will receive me? But it will bevery dreadful, with this feeling of hunger, faintness, chill, and thissense of desolation—this total prostration of hope. In all likelihood,though, I should die before morning. And why cannot I reconcile myselfto the prospect of death? Why do I struggle to retain a valueless life?Because I know, or believe, Mr. Rochester is living: and then, to dieof want and cold is a fate to which nature cannot submit passively. Oh,Providence! sustain me a little longer! Aid!—direct me!”My glazed eye wandered over the dim and misty landscape. I saw I hadstrayed far from the village: it was quite out of sight. The verycultivation surrounding it had disappeared. I had, by cross-ways andby-paths, once more drawn near the tract of moorland; and now, only afew fields, almost as wild and unproductive as the heath from whichthey were scarcely reclaimed, lay between me and the dusky hill.“Well, I would rather die yonder than in a street or on a frequentedroad,” I reflected. “And far better that crows and ravens—if any ravensthere be in these regions—should pick my flesh from my bones, than thatthey should be prisoned in a workhouse coffin and moulder in a pauper’sgrave.”To the hill, then, I turned. I reached it. It remained now only to finda hollow where I could lie down, and feel at least hidden, if notsecure. But all the surface of the waste looked level. It showed novariation but of tint: green, where rush and moss overgrew the marshes;black, where the dry soil bore only heath. Dark as it was getting, Icould still see these changes, though but as mere alternations of lightand shade; for colour had faded with the daylight.My eye still roved over the sullen swell and along the moor-edge,vanishing amidst the wildest scenery, when at one dim point, far inamong the marshes and the ridges, a light sprang up. “That is an _ignisfatuus_,” was my first thought; and I expected it would soon vanish. Itburnt on, however, quite steadily, neither receding nor advancing. “Isit, then, a bonfire just kindled?” I questioned. I watched to seewhether it would spread: but no; as it did not diminish, so it did notenlarge. “It may be a candle in a house,” I then conjectured; “but ifso, I can never reach it. It is much too far away: and were it within ayard of me, what would it avail? I should but knock at the door to haveit shut in my face.”And I sank down where I stood, and hid my face against the ground. Ilay still a while: the night-wind swept over the hill and over me, anddied moaning in the distance; the rain fell fast, wetting me afresh tothe skin. Could I but have stiffened to the still frost—the friendlynumbness of death—it might have pelted on; I should not have felt it;but my yet living flesh shuddered at its chilling influence. I rose erelong.The light was yet there, shining dim but constant through the rain. Itried to walk again: I dragged my exhausted limbs slowly towards it. Itled me aslant over the hill, through a wide bog, which would have beenimpassable in winter, and was splashy and shaking even now, in theheight of summer. Here I fell twice; but as often I rose and rallied myfaculties. This light was my forlorn hope: I must gain it.Having crossed the marsh, I saw a trace of white over the moor. Iapproached it; it was a road or a track: it led straight up to thelight, which now beamed from a sort of knoll, amidst a clump oftrees—firs, apparently, from what I could distinguish of the characterof their forms and foliage through the gloom. My star vanished as Idrew near: some obstacle had intervened between me and it. I put out myhand to feel the dark mass before me: I discriminated the rough stonesof a low wall—above it, something like palisades, and within, a highand prickly hedge. I groped on. Again a whitish object gleamed beforeme: it was a gate—a wicket; it moved on its hinges as I touched it. Oneach side stood a sable bush—holly or yew.Entering the gate and passing the shrubs, the silhouette of a houserose to view, black, low, and rather long; but the guiding light shonenowhere. All was obscurity. Were the inmates retired to rest? I fearedit must be so. In seeking the door, I turned an angle: there shot outthe friendly gleam again, from the lozenged panes of a very smalllatticed window, within a foot of the ground, made still smaller by thegrowth of ivy or some other creeping plant, whose leaves clusteredthick over the portion of the house wall in which it was set. Theaperture was so screened and narrow, that curtain or shutter had beendeemed unnecessary; and when I stooped down and put aside the spray offoliage shooting over it, I could see all within. I could see clearly aroom with a sanded floor, clean scoured; a dresser of walnut, withpewter plates ranged in rows, reflecting the redness and radiance of aglowing peat-fire. I could see a clock, a white deal table, somechairs. The candle, whose ray had been my beacon, burnt on the table;and by its light an elderly woman, somewhat rough-looking, butscrupulously clean, like all about her, was knitting a stocking.I noticed these objects cursorily only—in them there was nothingextraordinary. A group of more interest appeared near the hearth,sitting still amidst the rosy peace and warmth suffusing it. Two young,graceful women—ladies in every point—sat, one in a low rocking-chair,the other on a lower stool; both wore deep mourning of crape andbombazeen, which sombre garb singularly set off very fair necks andfaces: a large old pointer dog rested its massive head on the knee ofone girl—in the lap of the other was cushioned a black cat.A strange place was this humble kitchen for such occupants! Who werethey? They could not be the daughters of the elderly person at thetable; for she looked like a rustic, and they were all delicacy andcultivation. I had nowhere seen such faces as theirs: and yet, as Igazed on them, I seemed intimate with every lineament. I cannot callthem handsome—they were too pale and grave for the word: as they eachbent over a book, they looked thoughtful almost to severity. A standbetween them supported a second candle and two great volumes, to whichthey frequently referred, comparing them, seemingly, with the smallerbooks they held in their hands, like people consulting a dictionary toaid them in the task of translation. This scene was as silent as if allthe figures had been shadows and the firelit apartment a picture: sohushed was it, I could hear the cinders fall from the grate, the clocktick in its obscure corner; and I even fancied I could distinguish theclick-click of the woman’s knitting-needles. When, therefore, a voicebroke the strange stillness at last, it was audible enough to me.“Listen, Diana,” said one of the absorbed students; “Franz and oldDaniel are together in the night-time, and Franz is telling a dreamfrom which he has awakened in terror—listen!” And in a low voice sheread something, of which not one word was intelligible to me; for itwas in an unknown tongue—neither French nor Latin. Whether it wereGreek or German I could not tell.“That is strong,” she said, when she had finished: “I relish it.” Theother girl, who had lifted her head to listen to her sister, repeated,while she gazed at the fire, a line of what had been read. At a laterday, I knew the language and the book; therefore, I will here quote theline: though, when I first heard it, it was only like a stroke onsounding brass to me—conveying no meaning:—“‘Da trat hervor Einer, anzusehen wie die Sternen Nacht.’ Good! good!”she exclaimed, while her dark and deep eye sparkled. “There you have adim and mighty archangel fitly set before you! The line is worth ahundred pages of fustian. ‘Ich wäge die Gedanken in der Schale meinesZornes und die Werke mit dem Gewichte meines Grimms.’ I like it!”Both were again silent.“Is there ony country where they talk i’ that way?” asked the oldwoman, looking up from her knitting.“Yes, Hannah—a far larger country than England, where they talk in noother way.”“Well, for sure case, I knawn’t how they can understand t’ one t’other:and if either o’ ye went there, ye could tell what they said, I guess?”“We could probably tell something of what they said, but not all—for weare not as clever as you think us, Hannah. We don’t speak German, andwe cannot read it without a dictionary to help us.”“And what good does it do you?”“We mean to teach it some time—or at least the elements, as they say;and then we shall get more money than we do now.”“Varry like: but give ower studying; ye’ve done enough for to-night.”“I think we have: at least I’m tired. Mary, are you?”“Mortally: after all, it’s tough work fagging away at a language withno master but a lexicon.”“It is, especially such a language as this crabbed but gloriousDeutsch. I wonder when St. John will come home.”“Surely he will not be long now: it is just ten (looking at a littlegold watch she drew from her girdle). It rains fast, Hannah: will youhave the goodness to look at the fire in the parlour?”The woman rose: she opened a door, through which I dimly saw a passage:soon I heard her stir a fire in an inner room; she presently came back.“Ah, childer!” said she, “it fair troubles me to go into yond’ roomnow: it looks so lonesome wi’ the chair empty and set back in acorner.”She wiped her eyes with her apron: the two girls, grave before, lookedsad now.“But he is in a better place,” continued Hannah: “we shouldn’t wish himhere again. And then, nobody need to have a quieter death nor he had.”“You say he never mentioned us?” inquired one of the ladies.“He hadn’t time, bairn: he was gone in a minute, was your father. Hehad been a bit ailing like the day before, but naught to signify; andwhen Mr. St. John asked if he would like either o’ ye to be sent for,he fair laughed at him. He began again with a bit of a heaviness in hishead the next day—that is, a fortnight sin’—and he went to sleep andniver wakened: he wor a’most stark when your brother went into t’chamber and fand him. Ah, childer! that’s t’ last o’ t’ old stock—forye and Mr. St. John is like of different soart to them ’at’s gone; forall your mother wor mich i’ your way, and a’most as book-learned. Shewor the pictur’ o’ ye, Mary: Diana is more like your father.”I thought them so similar I could not tell where the old servant (forsuch I now concluded her to be) saw the difference. Both were faircomplexioned and slenderly made; both possessed faces full ofdistinction and intelligence. One, to be sure, had hair a shade darkerthan the other, and there was a difference in their style of wearingit; Mary’s pale brown locks were parted and braided smooth: Diana’sduskier tresses covered her neck with thick curls. The clock struckten.“Ye’ll want your supper, I am sure,” observed Hannah; “and so will Mr.St. John when he comes in.”And she proceeded to prepare the meal. The ladies rose; they seemedabout to withdraw to the parlour. Till this moment, I had been sointent on watching them, their appearance and conversation had excitedin me so keen an interest, I had half-forgotten my own wretchedposition: now it recurred to me. More desolate, more desperate thanever, it seemed from contrast. And how impossible did it appear totouch the inmates of this house with concern on my behalf; to make thembelieve in the truth of my wants and woes—to induce them to vouchsafe arest for my wanderings! As I groped out the door, and knocked at ithesitatingly, I felt that last idea to be a mere chimera. Hannahopened.“What do you want?” she inquired, in a voice of surprise, as shesurveyed me by the light of the candle she held.“May I speak to your mistresses?” I said.“You had better tell me what you have to say to them. Where do you comefrom?”“I am a stranger.”“What is your business here at this hour?”“I want a night’s shelter in an out-house or anywhere, and a morsel ofbread to eat.”Distrust, the very feeling I dreaded, appeared in Hannah’s face. “I’llgive you a piece of bread,” she said, after a pause; “but we can’t takein a vagrant to lodge. It isn’t likely.”“Do let me speak to your mistresses.”“No, not I. What can they do for you? You should not be roving aboutnow; it looks very ill.”“But where shall I go if you drive me away? What shall I do?”“Oh, I’ll warrant you know where to go and what to do. Mind you don’tdo wrong, that’s all. Here is a penny; now go—”“A penny cannot feed me, and I have no strength to go farther. Don’tshut the door:—oh, don’t, for God’s sake!”“I must; the rain is driving in—”“Tell the young ladies. Let me see them—”“Indeed, I will not. You are not what you ought to be, or you wouldn’tmake such a noise. Move off.”“But I must die if I am turned away.”“Not you. I’m fear’d you have some ill plans agate, that bring youabout folk’s houses at this time o’ night. If you’ve anyfollowers—housebreakers or such like—anywhere near, you may tell themwe are not by ourselves in the house; we have a gentleman, and dogs,and guns.” Here the honest but inflexible servant clapped the door toand bolted it within.This was the climax. A pang of exquisite suffering—a throe of truedespair—rent and heaved my heart. Worn out, indeed, I was; not anotherstep could I stir. I sank on the wet doorstep: I groaned—I wrung myhands—I wept in utter anguish. Oh, this spectre of death! Oh, this lasthour, approaching in such horror! Alas, this isolation—this banishmentfrom my kind! Not only the anchor of hope, but the footing of fortitudewas gone—at least for a moment; but the last I soon endeavoured toregain.“I can but die,” I said, “and I believe in God. Let me try to wait Hiswill in silence.”These words I not only thought, but uttered; and thrusting back all mymisery into my heart, I made an effort to compel it to remainthere—dumb and still.“All men must die,” said a voice quite close at hand; “but all are notcondemned to meet a lingering and premature doom, such as yours wouldbe if you perished here of want.”“Who or what speaks?” I asked, terrified at the unexpected sound, andincapable now of deriving from any occurrence a hope of aid. A form wasnear—what form, the pitch-dark night and my enfeebled vision preventedme from distinguishing. With a loud long knock, the new-comer appealedto the door.“Is it you, Mr. St. John?” cried Hannah.“Yes—yes; open quickly.”“Well, how wet and cold you must be, such a wild night as it is! Comein—your sisters are quite uneasy about you, and I believe there are badfolks about. There has been a beggar-woman—I declare she is not goneyet!—laid down there. Get up! for shame! Move off, I say!”“Hush, Hannah! I have a word to say to the woman. You have done yourduty in excluding, now let me do mine in admitting her. I was near, andlistened to both you and her. I think this is a peculiar case—I must atleast examine into it. Young woman, rise, and pass before me into thehouse.”Hush, Hannah; I have a word to say to the womanWith difficulty I obeyed him. Presently I stood within that clean,bright kitchen—on the very hearth—trembling, sickening; conscious of anaspect in the last degree ghastly, wild, and weather-beaten. The twoladies, their brother, Mr. St. John, the old servant, were all gazingat me.“St. John, who is it?” I heard one ask.“I cannot tell: I found her at the door,” was the reply.“She does look white,” said Hannah.“As white as clay or death,” was responded. “She will fall: let hersit.”And indeed my head swam: I dropped, but a chair received me. I stillpossessed my senses, though just now I could not speak.“Perhaps a little water would restore her. Hannah, fetch some. But sheis worn to nothing. How very thin, and how very bloodless!”“A mere spectre!”“Is she ill, or only famished?”“Famished, I think. Hannah, is that milk? Give it me, and a piece ofbread.”Diana (I knew her by the long curls which I saw drooping between me andthe fire as she bent over me) broke some bread, dipped it in milk, andput it to my lips. Her face was near mine: I saw there was pity in it,and I felt sympathy in her hurried breathing. In her simple words, too,the same balm-like emotion spoke: “Try to eat.”“Yes—try,” repeated Mary gently; and Mary’s hand removed my soddenbonnet and lifted my head. I tasted what they offered me: feebly atfirst, eagerly soon.“Not too much at first—restrain her,” said the brother; “she has hadenough.” And he withdrew the cup of milk and the plate of bread.“A little more, St. John—look at the avidity in her eyes.”“No more at present, sister. Try if she can speak now—ask her hername.”I felt I could speak, and I answered—“My name is Jane Elliott.” Anxiousas ever to avoid discovery, I had before resolved to assume an _alias_.“And where do you live? Where are your friends?”I was silent.“Can we send for any one you know?”I shook my head.“What account can you give of yourself?”Somehow, now that I had once crossed the threshold of this house, andonce was brought face to face with its owners, I felt no longeroutcast, vagrant, and disowned by the wide world. I dared to put offthe mendicant—to resume my natural manner and character. I began oncemore to know myself; and when Mr. St. John demanded an account—which atpresent I was far too weak to render—I said after a brief pause—“Sir, I can give you no details to-night.”“But what, then,” said he, “do you expect me to do for you?”“Nothing,” I replied. My strength sufficed for but short answers. Dianatook the word—“Do you mean,” she asked, “that we have now given you what aid yourequire? and that we may dismiss you to the moor and the rainy night?”I looked at her. She had, I thought, a remarkable countenance, instinctboth with power and goodness. I took sudden courage. Answering hercompassionate gaze with a smile, I said—“I will trust you. If I were amasterless and stray dog, I know that you would not turn me from yourhearth to-night: as it is, I really have no fear. Do with me and for meas you like; but excuse me from much discourse—my breath is short—Ifeel a spasm when I speak.” All three surveyed me, and all three weresilent.“Hannah,” said Mr. St. John, at last, “let her sit there at present,and ask her no questions; in ten minutes more, give her the remainderof that milk and bread. Mary and Diana, let us go into the parlour andtalk the matter over.”They withdrew. Very soon one of the ladies returned—I could not tellwhich. A kind of pleasant stupor was stealing over me as I sat by thegenial fire. In an undertone she gave some directions to Hannah. Erelong, with the servant’s aid, I contrived to mount a staircase; mydripping clothes were removed; soon a warm, dry bed received me. Ithanked God—experienced amidst unutterable exhaustion a glow ofgrateful joy—and slept.CHAPTER XXIXThe recollection of about three days and nights succeeding this is verydim in my mind. I can recall some sensations felt in that interval; butfew thoughts framed, and no actions performed. I knew I was in a smallroom and in a narrow bed. To that bed I seemed to have grown; I lay onit motionless as a stone; and to have torn me from it would have beenalmost to kill me. I took no note of the lapse of time—of the changefrom morning to noon, from noon to evening. I observed when any oneentered or left the apartment: I could even tell who they were; I couldunderstand what was said when the speaker stood near to me; but I couldnot answer; to open my lips or move my limbs was equally impossible.Hannah, the servant, was my most frequent visitor. Her coming disturbedme. I had a feeling that she wished me away: that she did notunderstand me or my circumstances; that she was prejudiced against me.Diana and Mary appeared in the chamber once or twice a day. They wouldwhisper sentences of this sort at my bedside—“It is very well we took her in.”“Yes; she would certainly have been found dead at the door in themorning had she been left out all night. I wonder what she has gonethrough?”“Strange hardships, I imagine—poor, emaciated, pallid wanderer!”“She is not an uneducated person, I should think, by her manner ofspeaking; her accent was quite pure; and the clothes she took off,though splashed and wet, were little worn and fine.”“She has a peculiar face; fleshless and haggard as it is, I rather likeit; and when in good health and animated, I can fancy her physiognomywould be agreeable.”Never once in their dialogues did I hear a syllable of regret at thehospitality they had extended to me, or of suspicion of, or aversionto, myself. I was comforted.Mr. St. John came but once: he looked at me, and said my state oflethargy was the result of reaction from excessive and protractedfatigue. He pronounced it needless to send for a doctor: nature, he wassure, would manage best, left to herself. He said every nerve had beenoverstrained in some way, and the whole system must sleep torpid awhile. There was no disease. He imagined my recovery would be rapidenough when once commenced. These opinions he delivered in a few words,in a quiet, low voice; and added, after a pause, in the tone of a manlittle accustomed to expansive comment, “Rather an unusual physiognomy;certainly, not indicative of vulgarity or degradation.”“Far otherwise,” responded Diana. “To speak truth, St. John, my heartrather warms to the poor little soul. I wish we may be able to benefither permanently.”“That is hardly likely,” was the reply. “You will find she is someyoung lady who has had a misunderstanding with her friends, and hasprobably injudiciously left them. We may, perhaps, succeed in restoringher to them, if she is not obstinate: but I trace lines of force in herface which make me sceptical of her tractability.” He stood consideringme some minutes; then added, “She looks sensible, but not at allhandsome.”“She is so ill, St. John.”“Ill or well, she would always be plain. The grace and harmony ofbeauty are quite wanting in those features.”On the third day I was better; on the fourth, I could speak, move, risein bed, and turn. Hannah had brought me some gruel and dry toast,about, as I supposed, the dinner-hour. I had eaten with relish: thefood was good—void of the feverish flavour which had hitherto poisonedwhat I had swallowed. When she left me, I felt comparatively strong andrevived: ere long satiety of repose and desire for action stirred me. Iwished to rise; but what could I put on? Only my damp and bemiredapparel; in which I had slept on the ground and fallen in the marsh. Ifelt ashamed to appear before my benefactors so clad. I was spared thehumiliation.On a chair by the bedside were all my own things, clean and dry. Myblack silk frock hung against the wall. The traces of the bog wereremoved from it; the creases left by the wet smoothed out: it was quitedecent. My very shoes and stockings were purified and renderedpresentable. There were the means of washing in the room, and a comband brush to smooth my hair. After a weary process, and resting everyfive minutes, I succeeded in dressing myself. My clothes hung loose onme; for I was much wasted, but I covered deficiencies with a shawl, andonce more, clean and respectable looking—no speck of the dirt, no traceof the disorder I so hated, and which seemed so to degrade me, left—Icrept down a stone staircase with the aid of the banisters, to a narrowlow passage, and found my way presently to the kitchen.It was full of the fragrance of new bread and the warmth of a generousfire. Hannah was baking. Prejudices, it is well known, are mostdifficult to eradicate from the heart whose soil has never beenloosened or fertilised by education: they grow there, firm as weedsamong stones. Hannah had been cold and stiff, indeed, at the first:latterly she had begun to relent a little; and when she saw me come intidy and well-dressed, she even smiled.“What, you have got up!” she said. “You are better, then. You may sityou down in my chair on the hearthstone, if you will.”She pointed to the rocking-chair: I took it. She bustled about,examining me every now and then with the corner of her eye. Turning tome, as she took some loaves from the oven, she asked bluntly—“Did you ever go a-begging afore you came here?”I was indignant for a moment; but remembering that anger was out of thequestion, and that I had indeed appeared as a beggar to her, I answeredquietly, but still not without a certain marked firmness—“You are mistaken in supposing me a beggar. I am no beggar; any morethan yourself or your young ladies.”After a pause she said, “I dunnut understand that: you’ve like nohouse, nor no brass, I guess?”“The want of house or brass (by which I suppose you mean money) doesnot make a beggar in your sense of the word.”“Are you book-learned?” she inquired presently.“Yes, very.”“But you’ve never been to a boarding-school?”“I was at a boarding-school eight years.”She opened her eyes wide. “Whatever cannot ye keep yourself for, then?”“I have kept myself; and, I trust, shall keep myself again. What areyou going to do with these gooseberries?” I inquired, as she broughtout a basket of the fruit.“Mak’ ’em into pies.”“Give them to me and I’ll pick them.”“Nay; I dunnut want ye to do nought.”“But I must do something. Let me have them.”She consented; and she even brought me a clean towel to spread over mydress, “lest,” as she said, “I should mucky it.”“Ye’ve not been used to sarvant’s wark, I see by your hands,” sheremarked. “Happen ye’ve been a dressmaker?”“No, you are wrong. And now, never mind what I have been: don’t troubleyour head further about me; but tell me the name of the house where weare.”“Some calls it Marsh End, and some calls it Moor House.”“And the gentleman who lives here is called Mr. St. John?”“Nay; he doesn’t live here: he is only staying a while. When he is athome, he is in his own parish at Morton.”“That village a few miles off?“Aye.”“And what is he?”“He is a parson.”I remembered the answer of the old housekeeper at the parsonage, when Ihad asked to see the clergyman. “This, then, was his father’sresidence?”“Aye; old Mr. Rivers lived here, and his father, and grandfather, andgurt (great) grandfather afore him.”“The name, then, of that gentleman, is Mr. St. John Rivers?”“Aye; St. John is like his kirstened name.”“And his sisters are called Diana and Mary Rivers?”“Yes.”“Their father is dead?”“Dead three weeks sin’ of a stroke.”“They have no mother?”“The mistress has been dead this mony a year.”“Have you lived with the family long?”“I’ve lived here thirty year. I nursed them all three.”“That proves you must have been an honest and faithful servant. I willsay so much for you, though you have had the incivility to call me abeggar.”She again regarded me with a surprised stare. “I believe,” she said, “Iwas quite mista’en in my thoughts of you: but there is so mony cheatsgoes about, you mun forgie me.”“And though,” I continued, rather severely, “you wished to turn me fromthe door, on a night when you should not have shut out a dog.”“Well, it was hard: but what can a body do? I thought more o’ th’childer nor of mysel: poor things! They’ve like nobody to tak’ care on’em but me. I’m like to look sharpish.”I maintained a grave silence for some minutes.“You munnut think too hardly of me,” she again remarked.“But I do think hardly of you,” I said; “and I’ll tell you why—not somuch because you refused to give me shelter, or regarded me as animpostor, as because you just now made it a species of reproach that Ihad no ‘brass’ and no house. Some of the best people that ever livedhave been as destitute as I am; and if you are a Christian, you oughtnot to consider poverty a crime.”“No more I ought,” said she: “Mr. St. John tells me so too; and I see Iwor wrang—but I’ve clear a different notion on you now to what I had.You look a raight down dacent little crater.”“That will do—I forgive you now. Shake hands.”She put her floury and horny hand into mine; another and heartier smileillumined her rough face, and from that moment we were friends.Hannah was evidently fond of talking. While I picked the fruit, and shemade the paste for the pies, she proceeded to give me sundry detailsabout her deceased master and mistress, and “the childer,” as shecalled the young people.Old Mr. Rivers, she said, was a plain man enough, but a gentleman, andof as ancient a family as could be found. Marsh End had belonged to theRivers ever since it was a house: and it was, she affirmed, “aboon twohundred year old—for all it looked but a small, humble place, naught tocompare wi’ Mr. Oliver’s grand hall down i’ Morton Vale. But she couldremember Bill Oliver’s father a journeyman needlemaker; and th’ Riverswor gentry i’ th’ owd days o’ th’ Henrys, as onybody might see bylooking into th’ registers i’ Morton Church vestry.” Still, sheallowed, “the owd maister was like other folk—naught mich out o’ t’common way: stark mad o’ shooting, and farming, and sich like.” Themistress was different. She was a great reader, and studied a deal; andthe “bairns” had taken after her. There was nothing like them in theseparts, nor ever had been; they had liked learning, all three, almostfrom the time they could speak; and they had always been “of a mak’ oftheir own.” Mr. St. John, when he grew up, would go to college and be aparson; and the girls, as soon as they left school, would seek placesas governesses: for they had told her their father had some years agolost a great deal of money by a man he had trusted turning bankrupt;and as he was now not rich enough to give them fortunes, they mustprovide for themselves. They had lived very little at home for a longwhile, and were only come now to stay a few weeks on account of theirfather’s death; but they did so like Marsh End and Morton, and allthese moors and hills about. They had been in London, and many othergrand towns; but they always said there was no place like home; andthen they were so agreeable with each other—never fell out nor“threaped.” She did not know where there was such a family for beingunited.Having finished my task of gooseberry picking, I asked where the twoladies and their brother were now.“Gone over to Morton for a walk; but they would be back in half-an-hourto tea.”They returned within the time Hannah had allotted them: they entered bythe kitchen door. Mr. St. John, when he saw me, merely bowed and passedthrough; the two ladies stopped: Mary, in a few words, kindly andcalmly expressed the pleasure she felt in seeing me well enough to beable to come down; Diana took my hand: she shook her head at me.“You should have waited for my leave to descend,” she said. “You stilllook very pale—and so thin! Poor child!—poor girl!”Diana had a voice toned, to my ear, like the cooing of a dove. Shepossessed eyes whose gaze I delighted to encounter. Her whole faceseemed to me full of charm. Mary’s countenance was equallyintelligent—her features equally pretty; but her expression was morereserved, and her manners, though gentle, more distant. Diana lookedand spoke with a certain authority: she had a will, evidently. It wasmy nature to feel pleasure in yielding to an authority supported likehers, and to bend, where my conscience and self-respect permitted, toan active will.“And what business have you here?” she continued. “It is not yourplace. Mary and I sit in the kitchen sometimes, because at home we liketo be free, even to license—but you are a visitor, and must go into theparlour.”“I am very well here.”“Not at all, with Hannah bustling about and covering you with flour.”“Besides, the fire is too hot for you,” interposed Mary.“To be sure,” added her sister. “Come, you must be obedient.” And stillholding my hand she made me rise, and led me into the inner room.“Sit there,” she said, placing me on the sofa, “while we take ourthings off and get the tea ready; it is another privilege we exercisein our little moorland home—to prepare our own meals when we are soinclined, or when Hannah is baking, brewing, washing, or ironing.”She closed the door, leaving me solus with Mr. St. John, who satopposite, a book or newspaper in his hand. I examined first, theparlour, and then its occupant.The parlour was rather a small room, very plainly furnished, yetcomfortable, because clean and neat. The old-fashioned chairs were verybright, and the walnut-wood table was like a looking-glass. A fewstrange, antique portraits of the men and women of other days decoratedthe stained walls; a cupboard with glass doors contained some books andan ancient set of china. There was no superfluous ornament in theroom—not one modern piece of furniture, save a brace of workboxes and alady’s desk in rosewood, which stood on a side-table:everything—including the carpet and curtains—looked at once well wornand well saved.Mr. St. John—sitting as still as one of the dusty pictures on thewalls, keeping his eyes fixed on the page he perused, and his lipsmutely sealed—was easy enough to examine. Had he been a statue insteadof a man, he could not have been easier. He was young—perhaps fromtwenty-eight to thirty—tall, slender; his face riveted the eye; it waslike a Greek face, very pure in outline: quite a straight, classicnose; quite an Athenian mouth and chin. It is seldom, indeed, anEnglish face comes so near the antique models as did his. He might wellbe a little shocked at the irregularity of my lineaments, his own beingso harmonious. His eyes were large and blue, with brown lashes; hishigh forehead, colourless as ivory, was partially streaked over bycareless locks of fair hair.This is a gentle delineation, is it not, reader? Yet he whom itdescribes scarcely impressed one with the idea of a gentle, a yielding,an impressible, or even of a placid nature. Quiescent as he now sat,there was something about his nostril, his mouth, his brow, which, tomy perceptions, indicated elements within either restless, or hard, oreager. He did not speak to me one word, nor even direct to me oneglance, till his sisters returned. Diana, as she passed in and out, inthe course of preparing tea, brought me a little cake, baked on the topof the oven.“Eat that now,” she said: “you must be hungry. Hannah says you have hadnothing but some gruel since breakfast.”I did not refuse it, for my appetite was awakened and keen. Mr. Riversnow closed his book, approached the table, and, as he took a seat,fixed his blue pictorial-looking eyes full on me. There was anunceremonious directness, a searching, decided steadfastness in hisgaze now, which told that intention, and not diffidence, had hithertokept it averted from the stranger.“You are very hungry,” he said.“I am, sir.” It is my way—it always was my way, by instinct—ever tomeet the brief with brevity, the direct with plainness.“It is well for you that a low fever has forced you to abstain for thelast three days: there would have been danger in yielding to thecravings of your appetite at first. Now you may eat, though still notimmoderately.”“I trust I shall not eat long at your expense, sir,” was my veryclumsily-contrived, unpolished answer.“No,” he said coolly: “when you have indicated to us the residence ofyour friends, we can write to them, and you may be restored to home.”“That, I must plainly tell you, is out of my power to do; beingabsolutely without home and friends.”The three looked at me, but not distrustfully; I felt there was nosuspicion in their glances: there was more of curiosity. I speakparticularly of the young ladies. St. John’s eyes, though clear enoughin a literal sense, in a figurative one were difficult to fathom. Heseemed to use them rather as instruments to search other people’sthoughts, than as agents to reveal his own: the which combination ofkeenness and reserve was considerably more calculated to embarrass thanto encourage.“Do you mean to say,” he asked, “that you are completely isolated fromevery connection?”“I do. Not a tie links me to any living thing: not a claim do I possessto admittance under any roof in England.”“A most singular position at your age!”Here I saw his glance directed to my hands, which were folded on thetable before me. I wondered what he sought there: his words soonexplained the quest.“You have never been married? You are a spinster?”Diana laughed. “Why, she can’t be above seventeen or eighteen yearsold, St. John,” said she.“I am near nineteen: but I am not married. No.”I felt a burning glow mount to my face; for bitter and agitatingrecollections were awakened by the allusion to marriage. They all sawthe embarrassment and the emotion. Diana and Mary relieved me byturning their eyes elsewhere than to my crimsoned visage; but thecolder and sterner brother continued to gaze, till the trouble he hadexcited forced out tears as well as colour.“Where did you last reside?” he now asked.“You are too inquisitive, St. John,” murmured Mary in a low voice; buthe leaned over the table and required an answer by a second firm andpiercing look.“The name of the place where, and of the person with whom I lived, ismy secret,” I replied concisely.“Which, if you like, you have, in my opinion, a right to keep, bothfrom St. John and every other questioner,” remarked Diana.“Yet if I know nothing about you or your history, I cannot help you,”he said. “And you need help, do you not?”“I need it, and I seek it so far, sir, that some true philanthropistwill put me in the way of getting work which I can do, and theremuneration for which will keep me, if but in the barest necessariesof life.”“I know not whether I am a true philanthropist; yet I am willing to aidyou to the utmost of my power in a purpose so honest. First, then, tellme what you have been accustomed to do, and what you _can_ do.”I had now swallowed my tea. I was mightily refreshed by the beverage;as much so as a giant with wine: it gave new tone to my unstrungnerves, and enabled me to address this penetrating young judgesteadily.“Mr. Rivers,” I said, turning to him, and looking at him, as he lookedat me, openly and without diffidence, “you and your sisters have doneme a great service—the greatest man can do his fellow-being; you haverescued me, by your noble hospitality, from death. This benefitconferred gives you an unlimited claim on my gratitude, and a claim, toa certain extent, on my confidence. I will tell you as much of thehistory of the wanderer you have harboured, as I can tell withoutcompromising my own peace of mind—my own security, moral and physical,and that of others.“I am an orphan, the daughter of a clergyman. My parents died before Icould know them. I was brought up a dependent; educated in a charitableinstitution. I will even tell you the name of the establishment, whereI passed six years as a pupil, and two as a teacher—Lowood OrphanAsylum, ——shire: you will have heard of it, Mr. Rivers?—the Rev. RobertBrocklehurst is the treasurer.”“I have heard of Mr. Brocklehurst, and I have seen the school.”“I left Lowood nearly a year since to become a private governess. Iobtained a good situation, and was happy. This place I was obliged toleave four days before I came here. The reason of my departure I cannotand ought not to explain: it would be useless, dangerous, and wouldsound incredible. No blame attached to me: I am as free fromculpability as any one of you three. Miserable I am, and must be for atime; for the catastrophe which drove me from a house I had found aparadise was of a strange and direful nature. I observed but two pointsin planning my departure—speed, secrecy: to secure these, I had toleave behind me everything I possessed except a small parcel; which, inmy hurry and trouble of mind, I forgot to take out of the coach thatbrought me to Whitcross. To this neighbourhood, then, I came, quitedestitute. I slept two nights in the open air, and wandered about twodays without crossing a threshold: but twice in that space of time didI taste food; and it was when brought by hunger, exhaustion, anddespair almost to the last gasp, that you, Mr. Rivers, forbade me toperish of want at your door, and took me under the shelter of yourroof. I know all your sisters have done for me since—for I have notbeen insensible during my seeming torpor—and I owe to theirspontaneous, genuine, genial compassion as large a debt as to yourevangelical charity.”“Don’t make her talk any more now, St. John,” said Diana, as I paused;“she is evidently not yet fit for excitement. Come to the sofa and sitdown now, Miss Elliott.”I gave an involuntary half start at hearing the _alias_: I hadforgotten my new name. Mr. Rivers, whom nothing seemed to escape,noticed it at once.“You said your name was Jane Elliott?” he observed.“I did say so; and it is the name by which I think it expedient to becalled at present, but it is not my real name, and when I hear it, itsounds strange to me.”“Your real name you will not give?”“No: I fear discovery above all things; and whatever disclosure wouldlead to it, I avoid.”“You are quite right, I am sure,” said Diana. “Now do, brother, let herbe at peace a while.”But when St. John had mused a few moments he recommenced asimperturbably and with as much acumen as ever.“You would not like to be long dependent on our hospitality—you wouldwish, I see, to dispense as soon as may be with my sisters’ compassion,and, above all, with my _charity_ (I am quite sensible of thedistinction drawn, nor do I resent it—it is just): you desire to beindependent of us?”“I do: I have already said so. Show me how to work, or how to seekwork: that is all I now ask; then let me go, if it be but to themeanest cottage; but till then, allow me to stay here: I dread anotheressay of the horrors of homeless destitution.”“Indeed you _shall_ stay here,” said Diana, putting her white hand onmy head. “You _shall_,” repeated Mary, in the tone of undemonstrativesincerity which seemed natural to her.“My sisters, you see, have a pleasure in keeping you,” said Mr. St.John, “as they would have a pleasure in keeping and cherishing ahalf-frozen bird, some wintry wind might have driven through theircasement. _I_ feel more inclination to put you in the way of keepingyourself, and shall endeavour to do so; but observe, my sphere isnarrow. I am but the incumbent of a poor country parish: my aid must beof the humblest sort. And if you are inclined to despise the day ofsmall things, seek some more efficient succour than such as I canoffer.”“She has already said that she is willing to do anything honest she_can_ do,” answered Diana for me; “and you know, St. John, she has nochoice of helpers: she is forced to put up with such crusty people asyou.”“I will be a dressmaker; I will be a plain-workwoman; I will be aservant, a nurse-girl, if I can be no better,” I answered.“Right,” said Mr. St. John, quite coolly. “If such is your spirit, Ipromise to aid you, in my own time and way.”He now resumed the book with which he had been occupied before tea. Isoon withdrew, for I had talked as much, and sat up as long, as mypresent strength would permit.CHAPTER XXXThe more I knew of the inmates of Moor House, the better I liked them.In a few days I had so far recovered my health that I could sit up allday, and walk out sometimes. I could join with Diana and Mary in alltheir occupations; converse with them as much as they wished, and aidthem when and where they would allow me. There was a reviving pleasurein this intercourse, of a kind now tasted by me for the first time—thepleasure arising from perfect congeniality of tastes, sentiments, andprinciples.I liked to read what they liked to read: what they enjoyed, delightedme; what they approved, I reverenced. They loved their sequesteredhome. I, too, in the grey, small, antique structure, with its low roof,its latticed casements, its mouldering walls, its avenue of agedfirs—all grown aslant under the stress of mountain winds; its garden,dark with yew and holly—and where no flowers but of the hardiestspecies would bloom—found a charm both potent and permanent. They clungto the purple moors behind and around their dwelling—to the hollow valeinto which the pebbly bridle-path leading from their gate descended,and which wound between fern-banks first, and then amongst a few of thewildest little pasture-fields that ever bordered a wilderness of heath,or gave sustenance to a flock of grey moorland sheep, with their littlemossy-faced lambs:—they clung to this scene, I say, with a perfectenthusiasm of attachment. I could comprehend the feeling, and shareboth its strength and truth. I saw the fascination of the locality. Ifelt the consecration of its loneliness: my eye feasted on the outlineof swell and sweep—on the wild colouring communicated to ridge and dellby moss, by heath-bell, by flower-sprinkled turf, by brilliant bracken,and mellow granite crag. These details were just to me what they wereto them—so many pure and sweet sources of pleasure. The strong blastand the soft breeze; the rough and the halcyon day; the hours ofsunrise and sunset; the moonlight and the clouded night, developed forme, in these regions, the same attraction as for them—wound round myfaculties the same spell that entranced theirs.Indoors we agreed equally well. They were both more accomplished andbetter read than I was; but with eagerness I followed in the path ofknowledge they had trodden before me. I devoured the books they lentme: then it was full satisfaction to discuss with them in the eveningwhat I had perused during the day. Thought fitted thought; opinion metopinion: we coincided, in short, perfectly.If in our trio there was a superior and a leader, it was Diana.Physically, she far excelled me: she was handsome; she was vigorous. Inher animal spirits there was an affluence of life and certainty offlow, such as excited my wonder, while it baffled my comprehension. Icould talk a while when the evening commenced, but the first gush ofvivacity and fluency gone, I was fain to sit on a stool at Diana’sfeet, to rest my head on her knee, and listen alternately to her andMary, while they sounded thoroughly the topic on which I had buttouched. Diana offered to teach me German. I liked to learn of her: Isaw the part of instructress pleased and suited her; that of scholarpleased and suited me no less. Our natures dovetailed: mutualaffection—of the strongest kind—was the result. They discovered I coulddraw: their pencils and colour-boxes were immediately at my service. Myskill, greater in this one point than theirs, surprised and charmedthem. Mary would sit and watch me by the hour together: then she wouldtake lessons; and a docile, intelligent, assiduous pupil she made. Thusoccupied, and mutually entertained, days passed like hours, and weekslike days.As to Mr. St John, the intimacy which had arisen so naturally andrapidly between me and his sisters did not extend to him. One reason ofthe distance yet observed between us was, that he was comparativelyseldom at home: a large proportion of his time appeared devoted tovisiting the sick and poor among the scattered population of hisparish.No weather seemed to hinder him in these pastoral excursions: rain orfair, he would, when his hours of morning study were over, take hishat, and, followed by his father’s old pointer, Carlo, go out on hismission of love or duty—I scarcely know in which light he regarded it.Sometimes, when the day was very unfavourable, his sisters wouldexpostulate. He would then say, with a peculiar smile, more solemn thancheerful—“And if I let a gust of wind or a sprinkling of rain turn me aside fromthese easy tasks, what preparation would such sloth be for the future Ipropose to myself?”Diana and Mary’s general answer to this question was a sigh, and someminutes of apparently mournful meditation.But besides his frequent absences, there was another barrier tofriendship with him: he seemed of a reserved, an abstracted, and evenof a brooding nature. Zealous in his ministerial labours, blameless inhis life and habits, he yet did not appear to enjoy that mentalserenity, that inward content, which should be the reward of everysincere Christian and practical philanthropist. Often, of an evening,when he sat at the window, his desk and papers before him, he wouldcease reading or writing, rest his chin on his hand, and deliverhimself up to I know not what course of thought; but that it wasperturbed and exciting might be seen in the frequent flash andchangeful dilation of his eye.I think, moreover, that Nature was not to him that treasury of delightit was to his sisters. He expressed once, and but once in my hearing, astrong sense of the rugged charm of the hills, and an inborn affectionfor the dark roof and hoary walls he called his home; but there wasmore of gloom than pleasure in the tone and words in which thesentiment was manifested; and never did he seem to roam the moors forthe sake of their soothing silence—never seek out or dwell upon thethousand peaceful delights they could yield.Incommunicative as he was, some time elapsed before I had anopportunity of gauging his mind. I first got an idea of its calibrewhen I heard him preach in his own church at Morton. I wish I coulddescribe that sermon: but it is past my power. I cannot even renderfaithfully the effect it produced on me.It began calm—and indeed, as far as delivery and pitch of voice went,it was calm to the end: an earnestly felt, yet strictly restrained zealbreathed soon in the distinct accents, and prompted the nervouslanguage. This grew to force—compressed, condensed, controlled. Theheart was thrilled, the mind astonished, by the power of the preacher:neither were softened. Throughout there was a strange bitterness; anabsence of consolatory gentleness; stern allusions to Calvinisticdoctrines—election, predestination, reprobation—were frequent; and eachreference to these points sounded like a sentence pronounced for doom.When he had done, instead of feeling better, calmer, more enlightenedby his discourse, I experienced an inexpressible sadness; for it seemedto me—I know not whether equally so to others—that the eloquence towhich I had been listening had sprung from a depth where lay turbiddregs of disappointment—where moved troubling impulses of insatiateyearnings and disquieting aspirations. I was sure St. JohnRivers—pure-lived, conscientious, zealous as he was—had not yet foundthat peace of God which passeth all understanding: he had no more foundit, I thought, than had I with my concealed and racking regrets for mybroken idol and lost elysium—regrets to which I have latterly avoidedreferring, but which possessed me and tyrannised over me ruthlessly.Meantime a month was gone. Diana and Mary were soon to leave MoorHouse, and return to the far different life and scene which awaitedthem, as governesses in a large, fashionable, south-of-England city,where each held a situation in families by whose wealthy and haughtymembers they were regarded only as humble dependents, and who neitherknew nor sought out their innate excellences, and appreciated onlytheir acquired accomplishments as they appreciated the skill of theircook or the taste of their waiting-woman. Mr. St. John had said nothingto me yet about the employment he had promised to obtain for me; yet itbecame urgent that I should have a vocation of some kind. One morning,being left alone with him a few minutes in the parlour, I ventured toapproach the window-recess—which his table, chair, and desk consecratedas a kind of study—and I was going to speak, though not very wellknowing in what words to frame my inquiry—for it is at all timesdifficult to break the ice of reserve glassing over such natures ashis—when he saved me the trouble by being the first to commence adialogue.Looking up as I drew near—“You have a question to ask of me?” he said.“Yes; I wish to know whether you have heard of any service I can offermyself to undertake?”“I found or devised something for you three weeks ago; but as youseemed both useful and happy here—as my sisters had evidently becomeattached to you, and your society gave them unusual pleasure—I deemedit inexpedient to break in on your mutual comfort till theirapproaching departure from Marsh End should render yours necessary.”“And they will go in three days now?” I said.“Yes; and when they go, I shall return to the parsonage at Morton:Hannah will accompany me; and this old house will be shut up.”I waited a few moments, expecting he would go on with the subject firstbroached: but he seemed to have entered another train of reflection:his look denoted abstraction from me and my business. I was obliged torecall him to a theme which was of necessity one of close and anxiousinterest to me.“What is the employment you had in view, Mr. Rivers? I hope this delaywill not have increased the difficulty of securing it.”“Oh, no; since it is an employment which depends only on me to give,and you to accept.”He again paused: there seemed a reluctance to continue. I grewimpatient: a restless movement or two, and an eager and exacting glancefastened on his face, conveyed the feeling to him as effectually aswords could have done, and with less trouble.“You need be in no hurry to hear,” he said: “let me frankly tell you, Ihave nothing eligible or profitable to suggest. Before I explain,recall, if you please, my notice, clearly given, that if I helped you,it must be as the blind man would help the lame. I am poor; for I findthat, when I have paid my father’s debts, all the patrimony remainingto me will be this crumbling grange, the row of scathed firs behind,and the patch of moorish soil, with the yew-trees and holly-bushes infront. I am obscure: Rivers is an old name; but of the three soledescendants of the race, two earn the dependent’s crust amongstrangers, and the third considers himself an alien from his nativecountry—not only for life, but in death. Yes, and deems, and is boundto deem, himself honoured by the lot, and aspires but after the daywhen the cross of separation from fleshly ties shall be laid on hisshoulders, and when the Head of that church-militant of whose humblestmembers he is one, shall give the word, ‘Rise, follow Me!’”St. John said these words as he pronounced his sermons, with a quiet,deep voice; with an unflushed cheek, and a coruscating radiance ofglance. He resumed—“And since I am myself poor and obscure, I can offer you but a serviceof poverty and obscurity. _You_ may even think it degrading—for I seenow your habits have been what the world calls refined: your tasteslean to the ideal, and your society has at least been amongst theeducated; but _I_ consider that no service degrades which can betterour race. I hold that the more arid and unreclaimed the soil where theChristian labourer’s task of tillage is appointed him—the scantier themeed his toil brings—the higher the honour. His, under suchcircumstances, is the destiny of the pioneer; and the first pioneers ofthe Gospel were the Apostles—their captain was Jesus, the Redeemer,Himself.”“Well?” I said, as he again paused—“proceed.”He looked at me before he proceeded: indeed, he seemed leisurely toread my face, as if its features and lines were characters on a page.The conclusions drawn from this scrutiny he partially expressed in hissucceeding observations.“I believe you will accept the post I offer you,” said he, “and hold itfor a while: not permanently, though: any more than I could permanentlykeep the narrow and narrowing—the tranquil, hidden office of Englishcountry incumbent; for in your nature is an alloy as detrimental torepose as that in mine, though of a different kind.”“Do explain,” I urged, when he halted once more.“I will; and you shall hear how poor the proposal is,—how trivial—howcramping. I shall not stay long at Morton, now that my father is dead,and that I am my own master. I shall leave the place probably in thecourse of a twelve-month; but while I do stay, I will exert myself tothe utmost for its improvement. Morton, when I came to it two yearsago, had no school: the children of the poor were excluded from everyhope of progress. I established one for boys: I mean now to open asecond school for girls. I have hired a building for the purpose, witha cottage of two rooms attached to it for the mistress’s house. Hersalary will be thirty pounds a year: her house is already furnished,very simply, but sufficiently, by the kindness of a lady, Miss Oliver;the only daughter of the sole rich man in my parish—Mr. Oliver, theproprietor of a needle-factory and iron-foundry in the valley. The samelady pays for the education and clothing of an orphan from theworkhouse, on condition that she shall aid the mistress in such menialoffices connected with her own house and the school as her occupationof teaching will prevent her having time to discharge in person. Willyou be this mistress?”He put the question rather hurriedly; he seemed half to expect anindignant, or at least a disdainful rejection of the offer: not knowingall my thoughts and feelings, though guessing some, he could not tellin what light the lot would appear to me. In truth it was humble—butthen it was sheltered, and I wanted a safe asylum: it was plodding—butthen, compared with that of a governess in a rich house, it wasindependent; and the fear of servitude with strangers entered my soullike iron: it was not ignoble—not unworthy—not mentally degrading, Imade my decision.“I thank you for the proposal, Mr. Rivers, and I accept it with all myheart.”“But you comprehend me?” he said. “It is a village school: yourscholars will be only poor girls—cottagers’ children—at the best,farmers’ daughters. Knitting, sewing, reading, writing, ciphering, willbe all you will have to teach. What will you do with youraccomplishments? What, with the largest portion of yourmind—sentiments—tastes?”“Save them till they are wanted. They will keep.”“You know what you undertake, then?”“I do.”He now smiled: and not a bitter or a sad smile, but one well pleasedand deeply gratified.“And when will you commence the exercise of your function?”“I will go to my house to-morrow, and open the school, if you like,next week.”“Very well: so be it.”He rose and walked through the room. Standing still, he again looked atme. He shook his head.“What do you disapprove of, Mr. Rivers?” I asked.“You will not stay at Morton long: no, no!”“Why? What is your reason for saying so?”“I read it in your eye; it is not of that description which promisesthe maintenance of an even tenor in life.”“I am not ambitious.”He started at the word “ambitious.” He repeated, “No. What made youthink of ambition? Who is ambitious? I know I am: but how did you findit out?”“I was speaking of myself.”“Well, if you are not ambitious, you are—” He paused.“What?”“I was going to say, impassioned: but perhaps you would havemisunderstood the word, and been displeased. I mean, that humanaffections and sympathies have a most powerful hold on you. I am sureyou cannot long be content to pass your leisure in solitude, and todevote your working hours to a monotonous labour wholly void ofstimulus: any more than I can be content,” he added, with emphasis, “tolive here buried in morass, pent in with mountains—my nature, that Godgave me, contravened; my faculties, heaven-bestowed, paralysed—madeuseless. You hear now how I contradict myself. I, who preachedcontentment with a humble lot, and justified the vocation even ofhewers of wood and drawers of water in God’s service—I, His ordainedminister, almost rave in my restlessness. Well, propensities andprinciples must be reconciled by some means.”He left the room. In this brief hour I had learnt more of him than inthe whole previous month: yet still he puzzled me.Diana and Mary Rivers became more sad and silent as the day approachedfor leaving their brother and their home. They both tried to appear asusual; but the sorrow they had to struggle against was one that couldnot be entirely conquered or concealed. Diana intimated that this wouldbe a different parting from any they had ever yet known. It wouldprobably, as far as St. John was concerned, be a parting for years: itmight be a parting for life.“He will sacrifice all to his long-framed resolves,” she said: “naturalaffection and feelings more potent still. St. John looks quiet, Jane;but he hides a fever in his vitals. You would think him gentle, yet insome things he is inexorable as death; and the worst of it is, myconscience will hardly permit me to dissuade him from his severedecision: certainly, I cannot for a moment blame him for it. It isright, noble, Christian: yet it breaks my heart!” And the tears gushedto her fine eyes. Mary bent her head low over her work.“We are now without father: we shall soon be without home and brother,”she murmured.At that moment a little accident supervened, which seemed decreed byfate purposely to prove the truth of the adage, that “misfortunes nevercome singly,” and to add to their distresses the vexing one of the slipbetween the cup and the lip. St. John passed the window reading aletter. He entered.“Our uncle John is dead,” said he.Both the sisters seemed struck: not shocked or appalled; the tidingsappeared in their eyes rather momentous than afflicting.“Dead?” repeated Diana.“Yes.”She riveted a searching gaze on her brother’s face. “And what then?”she demanded, in a low voice.“What then, Die?” he replied, maintaining a marble immobility offeature. “What then? Why—nothing. Read.”He threw the letter into her lap. She glanced over it, and handed it toMary. Mary perused it in silence, and returned it to her brother. Allthree looked at each other, and all three smiled—a dreary, pensivesmile enough.“Amen! We can yet live,” said Diana at last.“At any rate, it makes us no worse off than we were before,” remarkedMary.“Only it forces rather strongly on the mind the picture of what _mighthave been_,” said Mr. Rivers, “and contrasts it somewhat too vividlywith what _is_.”He folded the letter, locked it in his desk, and again went out.For some minutes no one spoke. Diana then turned to me.“Jane, you will wonder at us and our mysteries,” she said, “and thinkus hard-hearted beings not to be more moved at the death of so near arelation as an uncle; but we have never seen him or known him. He wasmy mother’s brother. My father and he quarrelled long ago. It was byhis advice that my father risked most of his property in thespeculation that ruined him. Mutual recrimination passed between them:they parted in anger, and were never reconciled. My uncle engagedafterwards in more prosperous undertakings: it appears he realised afortune of twenty thousand pounds. He was never married, and had nonear kindred but ourselves and one other person, not more closelyrelated than we. My father always cherished the idea that he wouldatone for his error by leaving his possessions to us; that letterinforms us that he has bequeathed every penny to the other relation,with the exception of thirty guineas, to be divided between St. John,Diana, and Mary Rivers, for the purchase of three mourning rings. Hehad a right, of course, to do as he pleased: and yet a momentary dampis cast on the spirits by the receipt of such news. Mary and I wouldhave esteemed ourselves rich with a thousand pounds each; and to St.John such a sum would have been valuable, for the good it would haveenabled him to do.”This explanation given, the subject was dropped, and no furtherreference made to it by either Mr. Rivers or his sisters. The next dayI left Marsh End for Morton. The day after, Diana and Mary quitted itfor distant B——. In a week, Mr. Rivers and Hannah repaired to theparsonage: and so the old grange was abandoned.CHAPTER XXXIMy home, then, when I at last find a home,—is a cottage; a little roomwith whitewashed walls and a sanded floor, containing four paintedchairs and a table, a clock, a cupboard, with two or three plates anddishes, and a set of tea-things in delf. Above, a chamber of the samedimensions as the kitchen, with a deal bedstead and chest of drawers;small, yet too large to be filled with my scanty wardrobe: though thekindness of my gentle and generous friends has increased that, by amodest stock of such things as are necessary.It is evening. I have dismissed, with the fee of an orange, the littleorphan who serves me as a handmaid. I am sitting alone on the hearth.This morning, the village school opened. I had twenty scholars. Butthree of the number can read: none write or cipher. Several knit, and afew sew a little. They speak with the broadest accent of the district.At present, they and I have a difficulty in understanding each other’slanguage. Some of them are unmannered, rough, intractable, as well asignorant; but others are docile, have a wish to learn, and evince adisposition that pleases me. I must not forget that these coarsely-cladlittle peasants are of flesh and blood as good as the scions ofgentlest genealogy; and that the germs of native excellence,refinement, intelligence, kind feeling, are as likely to exist in theirhearts as in those of the best-born. My duty will be to develop thesegerms: surely I shall find some happiness in discharging that office.Much enjoyment I do not expect in the life opening before me: yet itwill, doubtless, if I regulate my mind, and exert my powers as I ought,yield me enough to live on from day to day.Was I very gleeful, settled, content, during the hours I passed inyonder bare, humble schoolroom this morning and afternoon? Not todeceive myself, I must reply—No: I felt desolate to a degree. Ifelt—yes, idiot that I am—I felt degraded. I doubted I had taken a stepwhich sank instead of raising me in the scale of social existence. Iwas weakly dismayed at the ignorance, the poverty, the coarseness ofall I heard and saw round me. But let me not hate and despise myselftoo much for these feelings; I know them to be wrong—that is a greatstep gained; I shall strive to overcome them. To-morrow, I trust, Ishall get the better of them partially; and in a few weeks, perhaps,they will be quite subdued. In a few months, it is possible, thehappiness of seeing progress, and a change for the better in myscholars may substitute gratification for disgust.Meantime, let me ask myself one question—Which is better?—To havesurrendered to temptation; listened to passion; made no painfuleffort—no struggle;—but to have sunk down in the silken snare; fallenasleep on the flowers covering it; wakened in a southern clime, amongstthe luxuries of a pleasure villa: to have been now living in France,Mr. Rochester’s mistress; delirious with his love half my time—for hewould—oh, yes, he would have loved me well for a while. He _did_ loveme—no one will ever love me so again. I shall never more know the sweethomage given to beauty, youth, and grace—for never to any one elseshall I seem to possess these charms. He was fond and proud of me—it iswhat no man besides will ever be.—But where am I wandering, and what amI saying, and above all, feeling? Whether is it better, I ask, to be aslave in a fool’s paradise at Marseilles—fevered with delusive blissone hour—suffocating with the bitterest tears of remorse and shame thenext—or to be a village-schoolmistress, free and honest, in a breezymountain nook in the healthy heart of England?Yes; I feel now that I was right when I adhered to principle and law,and scorned and crushed the insane promptings of a frenzied moment. Goddirected me to a correct choice: I thank His providence for theguidance!Having brought my eventide musings to this point, I rose, went to mydoor, and looked at the sunset of the harvest-day, and at the quietfields before my cottage, which, with the school, was distant half amile from the village. The birds were singing their last strains—“The air was mild, the dew was balm.”While I looked, I thought myself happy, and was surprised to findmyself ere long weeping—and why? For the doom which had reft me fromadhesion to my master: for him I was no more to see; for the desperategrief and fatal fury—consequences of my departure—which might now,perhaps, be dragging him from the path of right, too far to leave hopeof ultimate restoration thither. At this thought, I turned my faceaside from the lovely sky of eve and lonely vale of Morton—I say_lonely_, for in that bend of it visible to me there was no buildingapparent save the church and the parsonage, half-hid in trees, and,quite at the extremity, the roof of Vale Hall, where the rich Mr.Oliver and his daughter lived. I hid my eyes, and leant my head againstthe stone frame of my door; but soon a slight noise near the wicketwhich shut in my tiny garden from the meadow beyond it made me look up.A dog—old Carlo, Mr. Rivers’ pointer, as I saw in a moment—was pushingthe gate with his nose, and St. John himself leant upon it with foldedarms; his brow knit, his gaze, grave almost to displeasure, fixed onme. I asked him to come in.“No, I cannot stay; I have only brought you a little parcel my sistersleft for you. I think it contains a colour-box, pencils, and paper.”I approached to take it: a welcome gift it was. He examined my face, Ithought, with austerity, as I came near: the traces of tears weredoubtless very visible upon it.“Have you found your first day’s work harder than you expected?” heasked.“Oh, no! On the contrary, I think in time I shall get on with myscholars very well.”“But perhaps your accommodations—your cottage—your furniture—havedisappointed your expectations? They are, in truth, scanty enough;but—” I interrupted—“My cottage is clean and weather-proof; my furniture sufficient andcommodious. All I see has made me thankful, not despondent. I am notabsolutely such a fool and sensualist as to regret the absence of acarpet, a sofa, and silver plate; besides, five weeks ago I hadnothing—I was an outcast, a beggar, a vagrant; now I have acquaintance,a home, a business. I wonder at the goodness of God; the generosity ofmy friends; the bounty of my lot. I do not repine.”“But you feel solitude an oppression? The little house there behind youis dark and empty.”“I have hardly had time yet to enjoy a sense of tranquillity, much lessto grow impatient under one of loneliness.”“Very well; I hope you feel the content you express: at any rate, yourgood sense will tell you that it is too soon yet to yield to thevacillating fears of Lot’s wife. What you had left before I saw you, ofcourse I do not know; but I counsel you to resist firmly everytemptation which would incline you to look back: pursue your presentcareer steadily, for some months at least.”“It is what I mean to do,” I answered. St. John continued—“It is hard work to control the workings of inclination and turn thebent of nature; but that it may be done, I know from experience. Godhas given us, in a measure, the power to make our own fate; and whenour energies seem to demand a sustenance they cannot get—when our willstrains after a path we may not follow—we need neither starve frominanition, nor stand still in despair: we have but to seek anothernourishment for the mind, as strong as the forbidden food it longed totaste—and perhaps purer; and to hew out for the adventurous foot a roadas direct and broad as the one Fortune has blocked up against us, ifrougher than it.“A year ago I was myself intensely miserable, because I thought I hadmade a mistake in entering the ministry: its uniform duties wearied meto death. I burnt for the more active life of the world—for the moreexciting toils of a literary career—for the destiny of an artist,author, orator; anything rather than that of a priest: yes, the heartof a politician, of a soldier, of a votary of glory, a lover of renown,a luster after power, beat under my curate’s surplice. I considered; mylife was so wretched, it must be changed, or I must die. After a seasonof darkness and struggling, light broke and relief fell: my crampedexistence all at once spread out to a plain without bounds—my powersheard a call from heaven to rise, gather their full strength, spreadtheir wings, and mount beyond ken. God had an errand for me; to bearwhich afar, to deliver it well, skill and strength, courage andeloquence, the best qualifications of soldier, statesman, and orator,were all needed: for these all centre in the good missionary.“A missionary I resolved to be. From that moment my state of mindchanged; the fetters dissolved and dropped from every faculty, leavingnothing of bondage but its galling soreness—which time only can heal.My father, indeed, imposed the determination, but since his death, Ihave not a legitimate obstacle to contend with; some affairs settled, asuccessor for Morton provided, an entanglement or two of the feelingsbroken through or cut asunder—a last conflict with human weakness, inwhich I know I shall overcome, because I have vowed that I _will_overcome—and I leave Europe for the East.”He said this, in his peculiar, subdued, yet emphatic voice; looking,when he had ceased speaking, not at me, but at the setting sun, atwhich I looked too. Both he and I had our backs towards the pathleading up the field to the wicket. We had heard no step on thatgrass-grown track; the water running in the vale was the one lullingsound of the hour and scene; we might well then start when a gay voice,sweet as a silver bell, exclaimed—“Good evening, Mr. Rivers. And good evening, old Carlo. Your dog isquicker to recognise his friends than you are, sir; he pricked his earsand wagged his tail when I was at the bottom of the field, and you haveyour back towards me now.”It was true. Though Mr. Rivers had started at the first of thosemusical accents, as if a thunderbolt had split a cloud over his head,he stood yet, at the close of the sentence, in the same attitude inwhich the speaker had surprised him—his arm resting on the gate, hisface directed towards the west. He turned at last, with measureddeliberation. A vision, as it seemed to me, had risen at his side.There appeared, within three feet of him, a form clad in pure white—ayouthful, graceful form: full, yet fine in contour; and when, afterbending to caress Carlo, it lifted up its head, and threw back a longveil, there bloomed under his glance a face of perfect beauty. Perfectbeauty is a strong expression; but I do not retrace or qualify it: assweet features as ever the temperate clime of Albion moulded; as purehues of rose and lily as ever her humid gales and vapoury skiesgenerated and screened, justified, in this instance, the term. No charmwas wanting, no defect was perceptible; the young girl had regular anddelicate lineaments; eyes shaped and coloured as we see them in lovelypictures, large, and dark, and full; the long and shadowy eyelash whichencircles a fine eye with so soft a fascination; the pencilled browwhich gives such clearness; the white smooth forehead, which adds suchrepose to the livelier beauties of tint and ray; the cheek oval, fresh,and smooth; the lips, fresh too, ruddy, healthy, sweetly formed; theeven and gleaming teeth without flaw; the small dimpled chin; theornament of rich, plenteous tresses—all advantages, in short, which,combined, realise the ideal of beauty, were fully hers. I wondered, asI looked at this fair creature: I admired her with my whole heart.Nature had surely formed her in a partial mood; and, forgetting herusual stinted step-mother dole of gifts, had endowed this, her darling,with a grand-dame’s bounty.What did St. John Rivers think of this earthly angel? I naturally askedmyself that question as I saw him turn to her and look at her; and, asnaturally, I sought the answer to the inquiry in his countenance. Hehad already withdrawn his eye from the Peri, and was looking at ahumble tuft of daisies which grew by the wicket.“A lovely evening, but late for you to be out alone,” he said, as hecrushed the snowy heads of the closed flowers with his foot.“Oh, I only came home from S——” (she mentioned the name of a large townsome twenty miles distant) “this afternoon. Papa told me you had openedyour school, and that the new mistress was come; and so I put on mybonnet after tea, and ran up the valley to see her: this is she?”pointing to me.“It is,” said St. John.“Do you think you shall like Morton?” she asked of me, with a directand naïve simplicity of tone and manner, pleasing, if child-like.“I hope I shall. I have many inducements to do so.”“Did you find your scholars as attentive as you expected?”“Quite.”“Do you like your house?”“Very much.”“Have I furnished it nicely?”“Very nicely, indeed.”“And made a good choice of an attendant for you in Alice Wood?”“You have indeed. She is teachable and handy.” (This then, I thought,is Miss Oliver, the heiress; favoured, it seems, in the gifts offortune, as well as in those of nature! What happy combination of theplanets presided over her birth, I wonder?)“I shall come up and help you to teach sometimes,” she added. “It willbe a change for me to visit you now and then; and I like a change. Mr.Rivers, I have been _so_ gay during my stay at S——. Last night, orrather this morning, I was dancing till two o’clock. The ——th regimentare stationed there since the riots; and the officers are the mostagreeable men in the world: they put all our young knife-grinders andscissor merchants to shame.”It seemed to me that Mr. St. John’s under lip protruded, and his upperlip curled a moment. His mouth certainly looked a good deal compressed,and the lower part of his face unusually stern and square, as thelaughing girl gave him this information. He lifted his gaze, too, fromthe daisies, and turned it on her. An unsmiling, a searching, a meaninggaze it was. She answered it with a second laugh, and laughter wellbecame her youth, her roses, her dimples, her bright eyes.As he stood, mute and grave, she again fell to caressing Carlo. “PoorCarlo loves me,” said she. “_He_ is not stern and distant to hisfriends; and if he could speak, he would not be silent.”As she patted the dog’s head, bending with native grace before hisyoung and austere master, I saw a glow rise to that master’s face. Isaw his solemn eye melt with sudden fire, and flicker with resistlessemotion. Flushed and kindled thus, he looked nearly as beautiful for aman as she for a woman. His chest heaved once, as if his large heart,weary of despotic constriction, had expanded, despite the will, andmade a vigorous bound for the attainment of liberty. But he curbed it,I think, as a resolute rider would curb a rearing steed. He respondedneither by word nor movement to the gentle advances made him.“Papa says you never come to see us now,” continued Miss Oliver,looking up. “You are quite a stranger at Vale Hall. He is alone thisevening, and not very well: will you return with me and visit him?”“It is not a seasonable hour to intrude on Mr. Oliver,” answered St.John.“Not a seasonable hour! But I declare it is. It is just the hour whenpapa most wants company: when the works are closed and he has nobusiness to occupy him. Now, Mr. Rivers, _do_ come. Why are you so veryshy, and so very sombre?” She filled up the hiatus his silence left bya reply of her own.“I forgot!” she exclaimed, shaking her beautiful curled head, as ifshocked at herself. “I am so giddy and thoughtless! _Do_ excuse me. Ithad slipped my memory that you have good reasons to be indisposed forjoining in my chatter. Diana and Mary have left you, and Moor House isshut up, and you are so lonely. I am sure I pity you. Do come and seepapa.”“Not to-night, Miss Rosamond, not to-night.”Mr. St. John spoke almost like an automaton: himself only knew theeffort it cost him thus to refuse.“Well, if you are so obstinate, I will leave you; for I dare not stayany longer: the dew begins to fall. Good evening!”She held out her hand. He just touched it. “Good evening!” he repeated,in a voice low and hollow as an echo. She turned, but in a momentreturned.“Are you well?” she asked. Well might she put the question: his facewas blanched as her gown.“Quite well,” he enunciated; and, with a bow, he left the gate. Shewent one way; he another. She turned twice to gaze after him as shetripped fairy-like down the field; he, as he strode firmly across,never turned at all.This spectacle of another’s suffering and sacrifice rapt my thoughtsfrom exclusive meditation on my own. Diana Rivers had designated herbrother “inexorable as death.” She had not exaggerated.CHAPTER XXXIII continued the labours of the village-school as actively andfaithfully as I could. It was truly hard work at first. Some timeelapsed before, with all my efforts, I could comprehend my scholars andtheir nature. Wholly untaught, with faculties quite torpid, they seemedto me hopelessly dull; and, at first sight, all dull alike: but I soonfound I was mistaken. There was a difference amongst them as amongstthe educated; and when I got to know them, and they me, this differencerapidly developed itself. Their amazement at me, my language, my rules,and ways, once subsided, I found some of these heavy-looking, gapingrustics wake up into sharp-witted girls enough. Many showed themselvesobliging, and amiable too; and I discovered amongst them not a fewexamples of natural politeness, and innate self-respect, as well as ofexcellent capacity, that won both my goodwill and my admiration. Thesesoon took a pleasure in doing their work well, in keeping their personsneat, in learning their tasks regularly, in acquiring quiet and orderlymanners. The rapidity of their progress, in some instances, was evensurprising; and an honest and happy pride I took in it: besides, Ibegan personally to like some of the best girls; and they liked me. Ihad amongst my scholars several farmers’ daughters: young women grown,almost. These could already read, write, and sew; and to them I taughtthe elements of grammar, geography, history, and the finer kinds ofneedlework. I found estimable characters amongst them—charactersdesirous of information and disposed for improvement—with whom I passedmany a pleasant evening hour in their own homes. Their parents then(the farmer and his wife) loaded me with attentions. There was anenjoyment in accepting their simple kindness, and in repaying it by aconsideration—a scrupulous regard to their feelings—to which they werenot, perhaps, at all times accustomed, and which both charmed andbenefited them; because, while it elevated them in their own eyes, itmade them emulous to merit the deferential treatment they received.I felt I became a favourite in the neighbourhood. Whenever I went out,I heard on all sides cordial salutations, and was welcomed withfriendly smiles. To live amidst general regard, though it be but theregard of working people, is like “sitting in sunshine, calm andsweet;” serene inward feelings bud and bloom under the ray. At thisperiod of my life, my heart far oftener swelled with thankfulness thansank with dejection: and yet, reader, to tell you all, in the midst ofthis calm, this useful existence—after a day passed in honourableexertion amongst my scholars, an evening spent in drawing or readingcontentedly alone—I used to rush into strange dreams at night: dreamsmany-coloured, agitated, full of the ideal, the stirring, thestormy—dreams where, amidst unusual scenes, charged with adventure,with agitating risk and romantic chance, I still again and again metMr. Rochester, always at some exciting crisis; and then the sense ofbeing in his arms, hearing his voice, meeting his eye, touching hishand and cheek, loving him, being loved by him—the hope of passing alifetime at his side, would be renewed, with all its first force andfire. Then I awoke. Then I recalled where I was, and how situated. ThenI rose up on my curtainless bed, trembling and quivering; and then thestill, dark night witnessed the convulsion of despair, and heard theburst of passion. By nine o’clock the next morning I was punctuallyopening the school; tranquil, settled, prepared for the steady dutiesof the day.Rosamond Oliver kept her word in coming to visit me. Her call at theschool was generally made in the course of her morning ride. She wouldcanter up to the door on her pony, followed by a mounted liveryservant. Anything more exquisite than her appearance, in her purplehabit, with her Amazon’s cap of black velvet placed gracefully abovethe long curls that kissed her cheek and floated to her shoulders, canscarcely be imagined: and it was thus she would enter the rusticbuilding, and glide through the dazzled ranks of the village children.She generally came at the hour when Mr. Rivers was engaged in givinghis daily catechising lesson. Keenly, I fear, did the eye of thevisitress pierce the young pastor’s heart. A sort of instinct seemed towarn him of her entrance, even when he did not see it; and when he waslooking quite away from the door, if she appeared at it, his cheekwould glow, and his marble-seeming features, though they refused torelax, changed indescribably, and in their very quiescence becameexpressive of a repressed fervour, stronger than working muscle ordarting glance could indicate.Of course, she knew her power: indeed, he did not, because he couldnot, conceal it from her. In spite of his Christian stoicism, when shewent up and addressed him, and smiled gaily, encouragingly, even fondlyin his face, his hand would tremble and his eye burn. He seemed to say,with his sad and resolute look, if he did not say it with his lips, “Ilove you, and I know you prefer me. It is not despair of success thatkeeps me dumb. If I offered my heart, I believe you would accept it.But that heart is already laid on a sacred altar: the fire is arrangedround it. It will soon be no more than a sacrifice consumed.”And then she would pout like a disappointed child; a pensive cloudwould soften her radiant vivacity; she would withdraw her hand hastilyfrom his, and turn in transient petulance from his aspect, at once soheroic and so martyr-like. St. John, no doubt, would have given theworld to follow, recall, retain her, when she thus left him; but hewould not give one chance of heaven, nor relinquish, for the elysium ofher love, one hope of the true, eternal Paradise. Besides, he could notbind all that he had in his nature—the rover, the aspirant, the poet,the priest—in the limits of a single passion. He could not—he wouldnot—renounce his wild field of mission warfare for the parlours and thepeace of Vale Hall. I learnt so much from himself in an inroad I once,despite his reserve, had the daring to make on his confidence.Miss Oliver already honoured me with frequent visits to my cottage. Ihad learnt her whole character, which was without mystery or disguise:she was coquettish but not heartless; exacting, but not worthlesslyselfish. She had been indulged from her birth, but was not absolutelyspoilt. She was hasty, but good-humoured; vain (she could not help it,when every glance in the glass showed her such a flush of loveliness),but not affected; liberal-handed; innocent of the pride of wealth;ingenuous; sufficiently intelligent; gay, lively, and unthinking: shewas very charming, in short, even to a cool observer of her own sexlike me; but she was not profoundly interesting or thoroughlyimpressive. A very different sort of mind was hers from that, forinstance, of the sisters of St. John. Still, I liked her almost as Iliked my pupil Adèle; except that, for a child whom we have watchedover and taught, a closer affection is engendered than we can give anequally attractive adult acquaintance.She had taken an amiable caprice to me. She said I was like Mr. Rivers,only, certainly, she allowed, “not one-tenth so handsome, though I wasa nice neat little soul enough, but he was an angel.” I was, however,good, clever, composed, and firm, like him. I was a _lusus naturæ_, sheaffirmed, as a village schoolmistress: she was sure my previoushistory, if known, would make a delightful romance.One evening, while, with her usual child-like activity, and thoughtlessyet not offensive inquisitiveness, she was rummaging the cupboard andthe table-drawer of my little kitchen, she discovered first two Frenchbooks, a volume of Schiller, a German grammar and dictionary, and thenmy drawing-materials and some sketches, including a pencil-head of apretty little cherub-like girl, one of my scholars, and sundry viewsfrom nature, taken in the Vale of Morton and on the surrounding moors.She was first transfixed with surprise, and then electrified withdelight.“Had I done these pictures? Did I know French and German? What alove—what a miracle I was! I drew better than her master in the firstschool in S——. Would I sketch a portrait of her, to show to papa?”“With pleasure,” I replied; and I felt a thrill of artist-delight atthe idea of copying from so perfect and radiant a model. She had thenon a dark-blue silk dress; her arms and her neck were bare; her onlyornament was her chestnut tresses, which waved over her shoulders withall the wild grace of natural curls. I took a sheet of fine card-board,and drew a careful outline. I promised myself the pleasure of colouringit; and, as it was getting late then, I told her she must come and sitanother day.She made such a report of me to her father, that Mr. Oliver himselfaccompanied her next evening—a tall, massive-featured, middle-aged, andgrey-headed man, at whose side his lovely daughter looked like a brightflower near a hoary turret. He appeared a taciturn, and perhaps a proudpersonage; but he was very kind to me. The sketch of Rosamond’sportrait pleased him highly: he said I must make a finished picture ofit. He insisted, too, on my coming the next day to spend the evening atVale Hall.I went. I found it a large, handsome residence, showing abundantevidences of wealth in the proprietor. Rosamond was full of glee andpleasure all the time I stayed. Her father was affable; and when heentered into conversation with me after tea, he expressed in strongterms his approbation of what I had done in Morton school, and said heonly feared, from what he saw and heard, I was too good for the place,and would soon quit it for one more suitable.“Indeed,” cried Rosamond, “she is clever enough to be a governess in ahigh family, papa.”I thought I would far rather be where I am than in any high family inthe land. Mr. Oliver spoke of Mr. Rivers—of the Rivers family—withgreat respect. He said it was a very old name in that neighbourhood;that the ancestors of the house were wealthy; that all Morton had oncebelonged to them; that even now he considered the representative ofthat house might, if he liked, make an alliance with the best. Heaccounted it a pity that so fine and talented a young man should haveformed the design of going out as a missionary; it was quite throwing avaluable life away. It appeared, then, that her father would throw noobstacle in the way of Rosamond’s union with St. John. Mr. Oliverevidently regarded the young clergyman’s good birth, old name, andsacred profession as sufficient compensation for the want of fortune.It was the 5th of November, and a holiday. My little servant, afterhelping me to clean my house, was gone, well satisfied with the fee ofa penny for her aid. All about me was spotless and bright—scouredfloor, polished grate, and well-rubbed chairs. I had also made myselfneat, and had now the afternoon before me to spend as I would.The translation of a few pages of German occupied an hour; then I gotmy palette and pencils, and fell to the more soothing, because easieroccupation, of completing Rosamond Oliver’s miniature. The head wasfinished already: there was but the background to tint and the draperyto shade off; a touch of carmine, too, to add to the ripe lips—a softcurl here and there to the tresses—a deeper tinge to the shadow of thelash under the azured eyelid. I was absorbed in the execution of thesenice details, when, after one rapid tap, my door unclosed, admittingSt. John Rivers.“I am come to see how you are spending your holiday,” he said. “Not, Ihope, in thought? No, that is well: while you draw you will not feellonely. You see, I mistrust you still, though you have borne upwonderfully so far. I have brought you a book for evening solace,” andhe laid on the table a new publication—a poem: one of those genuineproductions so often vouchsafed to the fortunate public of thosedays—the golden age of modern literature. Alas! the readers of our eraare less favoured. But courage! I will not pause either to accuse orrepine. I know poetry is not dead, nor genius lost; nor has Mammongained power over either, to bind or slay: they will both assert theirexistence, their presence, their liberty and strength again one day.Powerful angels, safe in heaven! they smile when sordid souls triumph,and feeble ones weep over their destruction. Poetry destroyed? Geniusbanished? No! Mediocrity, no: do not let envy prompt you to thethought. No; they not only live, but reign and redeem: and withouttheir divine influence spread everywhere, you would be in hell—the hellof your own meanness.While I was eagerly glancing at the bright pages of “Marmion” (for“Marmion” it was), St. John stooped to examine my drawing. His tallfigure sprang erect again with a start: he said nothing. I looked up athim: he shunned my eye. I knew his thoughts well, and could read hisheart plainly; at the moment I felt calmer and cooler than he: I hadthen temporarily the advantage of him, and I conceived an inclinationto do him some good, if I could.“With all his firmness and self-control,” thought I, “he tasks himselftoo far: locks every feeling and pang within—expresses, confesses,imparts nothing. I am sure it would benefit him to talk a little aboutthis sweet Rosamond, whom he thinks he ought not to marry: I will makehim talk.”I said first, “Take a chair, Mr. Rivers.” But he answered, as he alwaysdid, that he could not stay. “Very well,” I responded, mentally, “standif you like; but you shall not go just yet, I am determined: solitudeis at least as bad for you as it is for me. I’ll try if I cannotdiscover the secret spring of your confidence, and find an aperture inthat marble breast through which I can shed one drop of the balm ofsympathy.”“Is this portrait like?” I asked bluntly.“Like! Like whom? I did not observe it closely.”“You did, Mr. Rivers.”He almost started at my sudden and strange abruptness: he looked at meastonished. “Oh, that is nothing yet,” I muttered within. “I don’t meanto be baffled by a little stiffness on your part; I’m prepared to go toconsiderable lengths.” I continued, “You observed it closely anddistinctly; but I have no objection to your looking at it again,” and Irose and placed it in his hand.“A well-executed picture,” he said; “very soft, clear colouring; verygraceful and correct drawing.”“Yes, yes; I know all that. But what of the resemblance? Who is itlike?”Mastering some hesitation, he answered, “Miss Oliver, I presume.”“Of course. And now, sir, to reward you for the accurate guess, I willpromise to paint you a careful and faithful duplicate of this verypicture, provided you admit that the gift would be acceptable to you. Idon’t wish to throw away my time and trouble on an offering you woulddeem worthless.”He continued to gaze at the picture: the longer he looked, the firmerhe held it, the more he seemed to covet it. “It is like!” he murmured;“the eye is well managed: the colour, light, expression, are perfect.It smiles!”“Would it comfort, or would it wound you to have a similar painting?Tell me that. When you are at Madagascar, or at the Cape, or in India,would it be a consolation to have that memento in your possession? orwould the sight of it bring recollections calculated to enervate anddistress?”He now furtively raised his eyes: he glanced at me, irresolute,disturbed: he again surveyed the picture.“That I should like to have it is certain: whether it would bejudicious or wise is another question.”Since I had ascertained that Rosamond really preferred him, and thather father was not likely to oppose the match, I—less exalted in myviews than St. John—had been strongly disposed in my own heart toadvocate their union. It seemed to me that, should he become thepossessor of Mr. Oliver’s large fortune, he might do as much good withit as if he went and laid his genius out to wither, and his strength towaste, under a tropical sun. With this persuasion I now answered—“As far as I can see, it would be wiser and more judicious if you wereto take to yourself the original at once.”By this time he had sat down: he had laid the picture on the tablebefore him, and with his brow supported on both hands, hung fondly overit. I discerned he was now neither angry nor shocked at my audacity. Isaw even that to be thus frankly addressed on a subject he had deemedunapproachable—to hear it thus freely handled—was beginning to be feltby him as a new pleasure—an unhoped-for relief. Reserved people oftenreally need the frank discussion of their sentiments and griefs morethan the expansive. The sternest-seeming stoic is human after all; andto “burst” with boldness and good-will into “the silent sea” of theirsouls is often to confer on them the first of obligations.“She likes you, I am sure,” said I, as I stood behind his chair, “andher father respects you. Moreover, she is a sweet girl—ratherthoughtless; but you would have sufficient thought for both yourselfand her. You ought to marry her.”“_Does_ she like me?” he asked.“Certainly; better than she likes any one else. She talks of youcontinually: there is no subject she enjoys so much or touches upon sooften.”“It is very pleasant to hear this,” he said—“very: go on for anotherquarter of an hour.” And he actually took out his watch and laid itupon the table to measure the time.“But where is the use of going on,” I asked, “when you are probablypreparing some iron blow of contradiction, or forging a fresh chain tofetter your heart?”“Don’t imagine such hard things. Fancy me yielding and melting, as I amdoing: human love rising like a freshly opened fountain in my mind andoverflowing with sweet inundation all the field I have so carefully andwith such labour prepared—so assiduously sown with the seeds of goodintentions, of self-denying plans. And now it is deluged with anectarous flood—the young germs swamped—delicious poison cankeringthem: now I see myself stretched on an ottoman in the drawing-room atVale Hall at my bride Rosamond Oliver’s feet: she is talking to me withher sweet voice—gazing down on me with those eyes your skilful hand hascopied so well—smiling at me with these coral lips. She is mine—I amhers—this present life and passing world suffice to me. Hush! saynothing—my heart is full of delight—my senses are entranced—let thetime I marked pass in peace.”I humoured him: the watch ticked on: he breathed fast and low: I stoodsilent. Amidst this hush the quartet sped; he replaced the watch, laidthe picture down, rose, and stood on the hearth.“Now,” said he, “that little space was given to delirium and delusion.I rested my temples on the breast of temptation, and put my neckvoluntarily under her yoke of flowers; I tasted her cup. The pillow wasburning: there is an asp in the garland: the wine has a bitter taste:her promises are hollow—her offers false: I see and know all this.”I gazed at him in wonder.“It is strange,” pursued he, “that while I love Rosamond Oliver sowildly—with all the intensity, indeed, of a first passion, the objectof which is exquisitely beautiful, graceful, fascinating—I experienceat the same time a calm, unwarped consciousness that she would not makeme a good wife; that she is not the partner suited to me; that I shoulddiscover this within a year after marriage; and that to twelve months’rapture would succeed a lifetime of regret. This I know.”“Strange indeed!” I could not help ejaculating.“While something in me,” he went on, “is acutely sensible to hercharms, something else is as deeply impressed with her defects: theyare such that she could sympathise in nothing I aspired to—co-operatein nothing I undertook. Rosamond a sufferer, a labourer, a femaleapostle? Rosamond a missionary’s wife? No!”“But you need not be a missionary. You might relinquish that scheme.”“Relinquish! What! my vocation? My great work? My foundation laid onearth for a mansion in heaven? My hopes of being numbered in the bandwho have merged all ambitions in the glorious one of bettering theirrace—of carrying knowledge into the realms of ignorance—of substitutingpeace for war—freedom for bondage—religion for superstition—the hope ofheaven for the fear of hell? Must I relinquish that? It is dearer thanthe blood in my veins. It is what I have to look forward to, and tolive for.”After a considerable pause, I said—“And Miss Oliver? Are herdisappointment and sorrow of no interest to you?”“Miss Oliver is ever surrounded by suitors and flatterers: in less thana month, my image will be effaced from her heart. She will forget me;and will marry, probably, some one who will make her far happier than Ishould do.”“You speak coolly enough; but you suffer in the conflict. You arewasting away.”“No. If I get a little thin, it is with anxiety about my prospects, yetunsettled—my departure, continually procrastinated. Only this morning,I received intelligence that the successor, whose arrival I have beenso long expecting, cannot be ready to replace me for three months tocome yet; and perhaps the three months may extend to six.”“You tremble and become flushed whenever Miss Oliver enters theschoolroom.”Again the surprised expression crossed his face. He had not imaginedthat a woman would dare to speak so to a man. For me, I felt at home inthis sort of discourse. I could never rest in communication withstrong, discreet, and refined minds, whether male or female, till I hadpassed the outworks of conventional reserve, and crossed the thresholdof confidence, and won a place by their heart’s very hearthstone.“You _are_ original,” said he, “and not timid. There is something bravein your spirit, as well as penetrating in your eye; but allow me toassure you that you partially misinterpret my emotions. You think themmore profound and potent than they are. You give me a larger allowanceof sympathy than I have a just claim to. When I colour, and when Ishake before Miss Oliver, I do not pity myself. I scorn the weakness. Iknow it is ignoble: a mere fever of the flesh: not, I declare, theconvulsion of the soul. _That_ is just as fixed as a rock, firm set inthe depths of a restless sea. Know me to be what I am—a cold hard man.”I smiled incredulously.“You have taken my confidence by storm,” he continued, “and now it ismuch at your service. I am simply, in my original state—stripped ofthat blood-bleached robe with which Christianity covers humandeformity—a cold, hard, ambitious man. Natural affection only, of allthe sentiments, has permanent power over me. Reason, and not feeling,is my guide; my ambition is unlimited: my desire to rise higher, to domore than others, insatiable. I honour endurance, perseverance,industry, talent; because these are the means by which men achievegreat ends and mount to lofty eminence. I watch your career withinterest, because I consider you a specimen of a diligent, orderly,energetic woman: not because I deeply compassionate what you have gonethrough, or what you still suffer.”“You would describe yourself as a mere pagan philosopher,” I said.“No. There is this difference between me and deistic philosophers: Ibelieve; and I believe the Gospel. You missed your epithet. I am not apagan, but a Christian philosopher—a follower of the sect of Jesus. AsHis disciple I adopt His pure, His merciful, His benignant doctrines. Iadvocate them: I am sworn to spread them. Won in youth to religion, shehas cultivated my original qualities thus:—From the minute germ,natural affection, she has developed the overshadowing tree,philanthropy. From the wild stringy root of human uprightness, she hasreared a due sense of the Divine justice. Of the ambition to win powerand renown for my wretched self, she has formed the ambition to spreadmy Master’s kingdom; to achieve victories for the standard of thecross. So much has religion done for me; turning the original materialsto the best account; pruning and training nature. But she could noteradicate nature: nor will it be eradicated ‘till this mortal shall puton immortality.’”Having said this, he took his hat, which lay on the table beside mypalette. Once more he looked at the portrait.“She _is_ lovely,” he murmured. “She is well named the Rose of theWorld, indeed!”“And may I not paint one like it for you?”“_Cui bono_? No.”He drew over the picture the sheet of thin paper on which I wasaccustomed to rest my hand in painting, to prevent the cardboard frombeing sullied. What he suddenly saw on this blank paper, it wasimpossible for me to tell; but something had caught his eye. He took itup with a snatch; he looked at the edge; then shot a glance at me,inexpressibly peculiar, and quite incomprehensible: a glance thatseemed to take and make note of every point in my shape, face, anddress; for it traversed all, quick, keen as lightning. His lips parted,as if to speak: but he checked the coming sentence, whatever it was.“What is the matter?” I asked.“Nothing in the world,” was the reply; and, replacing the paper, I sawhim dexterously tear a narrow slip from the margin. It disappeared inhis glove; and, with one hasty nod and “good-afternoon,” he vanished.“Well!” I exclaimed, using an expression of the district, “that capsthe globe, however!”I, in my turn, scrutinised the paper; but saw nothing on it save a fewdingy stains of paint where I had tried the tint in my pencil. Ipondered the mystery a minute or two; but finding it insolvable, andbeing certain it could not be of much moment, I dismissed, and soonforgot it.CHAPTER XXXIIIWhen Mr. St. John went, it was beginning to snow; the whirling stormcontinued all night. The next day a keen wind brought fresh andblinding falls; by twilight the valley was drifted up and almostimpassable. I had closed my shutter, laid a mat to the door to preventthe snow from blowing in under it, trimmed my fire, and after sittingnearly an hour on the hearth listening to the muffled fury of thetempest, I lit a candle, took down “Marmion,” and beginning—“Day set on Norham’s castled steep,And Tweed’s fair river broad and deep,    And Cheviot’s mountains lone;The massive towers, the donjon keep,The flanking walls that round them sweep,    In yellow lustre shone”—I soon forgot storm in music.I heard a noise: the wind, I thought, shook the door. No; it was St.John Rivers, who, lifting the latch, came in out of the frozenhurricane—the howling darkness—and stood before me: the cloak thatcovered his tall figure all white as a glacier. I was almost inconsternation, so little had I expected any guest from the blocked-upvale that night.“Any ill news?” I demanded. “Has anything happened?”“No. How very easily alarmed you are!” he answered, removing his cloakand hanging it up against the door, towards which he again coollypushed the mat which his entrance had deranged. He stamped the snowfrom his boots.“I shall sully the purity of your floor,” said he, “but you must excuseme for once.” Then he approached the fire. “I have had hard work to gethere, I assure you,” he observed, as he warmed his hands over theflame. “One drift took me up to the waist; happily the snow is quitesoft yet.”“But why are you come?” I could not forbear saying.“Rather an inhospitable question to put to a visitor; but since you askit, I answer simply to have a little talk with you; I got tired of mymute books and empty rooms. Besides, since yesterday I have experiencedthe excitement of a person to whom a tale has been half-told, and whois impatient to hear the sequel.”He sat down. I recalled his singular conduct of yesterday, and really Ibegan to fear his wits were touched. If he were insane, however, hiswas a very cool and collected insanity: I had never seen thathandsome-featured face of his look more like chiselled marble than itdid just now, as he put aside his snow-wet hair from his forehead andlet the firelight shine free on his pale brow and cheek as pale, whereit grieved me to discover the hollow trace of care or sorrow now soplainly graved. I waited, expecting he would say something I could atleast comprehend; but his hand was now at his chin, his finger on hislip: he was thinking. It struck me that his hand looked wasted like hisface. A perhaps uncalled-for gush of pity came over my heart: I wasmoved to say—“I wish Diana or Mary would come and live with you: it is too bad thatyou should be quite alone; and you are recklessly rash about your ownhealth.”“Not at all,” said he: “I care for myself when necessary. I am wellnow. What do you see amiss in me?”This was said with a careless, abstracted indifference, which showedthat my solicitude was, at least in his opinion, wholly superfluous. Iwas silenced.He still slowly moved his finger over his upper lip, and still his eyedwelt dreamily on the glowing grate; thinking it urgent to saysomething, I asked him presently if he felt any cold draught from thedoor, which was behind him.“No, no!” he responded shortly and somewhat testily.“Well,” I reflected, “if you won’t talk, you may be still; I’ll let youalone now, and return to my book.”So I snuffed the candle and resumed the perusal of “Marmion.” He soonstirred; my eye was instantly drawn to his movements; he only took outa morocco pocket-book, thence produced a letter, which he read insilence, folded it, put it back, relapsed into meditation. It was vainto try to read with such an inscrutable fixture before me; nor could I,in impatience, consent to be dumb; he might rebuff me if he liked, buttalk I would.“Have you heard from Diana and Mary lately?”“Not since the letter I showed you a week ago.”“There has not been any change made about your own arrangements? Youwill not be summoned to leave England sooner than you expected?”“I fear not, indeed: such chance is too good to befall me.” Baffled sofar, I changed my ground. I bethought myself to talk about the schooland my scholars.“Mary Garrett’s mother is better, and Mary came back to the school thismorning, and I shall have four new girls next week from the FoundryClose—they would have come to-day but for the snow.”“Indeed!”“Mr. Oliver pays for two.”“Does he?”“He means to give the whole school a treat at Christmas.”“I know.”“Was it your suggestion?”“No.”“Whose, then?”“His daughter’s, I think.”“It is like her: she is so good-natured.”“Yes.”Again came the blank of a pause: the clock struck eight strokes. Itaroused him; he uncrossed his legs, sat erect, turned to me.“Leave your book a moment, and come a little nearer the fire,” he said.Wondering, and of my wonder finding no end, I complied.“Half-an-hour ago,” he pursued, “I spoke of my impatience to hear thesequel of a tale: on reflection, I find the matter will be bettermanaged by my assuming the narrator’s part, and converting you into alistener. Before commencing, it is but fair to warn you that the storywill sound somewhat hackneyed in your ears; but stale details oftenregain a degree of freshness when they pass through new lips. For therest, whether trite or novel, it is short.“Twenty years ago, a poor curate—never mind his name at thismoment—fell in love with a rich man’s daughter; she fell in love withhim, and married him, against the advice of all her friends, whoconsequently disowned her immediately after the wedding. Before twoyears passed, the rash pair were both dead, and laid quietly side byside under one slab. (I have seen their grave; it formed part of thepavement of a huge churchyard surrounding the grim, soot-black oldcathedral of an overgrown manufacturing town in ——shire.) They left adaughter, which, at its very birth, Charity received in her lap—cold asthat of the snow-drift I almost stuck fast in to-night. Charity carriedthe friendless thing to the house of its rich maternal relations; itwas reared by an aunt-in-law, called (I come to names now) Mrs. Reed ofGateshead. You start—did you hear a noise? I daresay it is only a ratscrambling along the rafters of the adjoining schoolroom: it was a barnbefore I had it repaired and altered, and barns are generally hauntedby rats.—To proceed. Mrs. Reed kept the orphan ten years: whether itwas happy or not with her, I cannot say, never having been told; but atthe end of that time she transferred it to a place you know—being noother than Lowood School, where you so long resided yourself. It seemsher career there was very honourable: from a pupil, she became ateacher, like yourself—really it strikes me there are parallel pointsin her history and yours—she left it to be a governess: there, again,your fates were analogous; she undertook the education of the ward of acertain Mr. Rochester.”“Mr. Rivers!” I interrupted.“I can guess your feelings,” he said, “but restrain them for a while: Ihave nearly finished; hear me to the end. Of Mr. Rochester’s characterI know nothing, but the one fact that he professed to offer honourablemarriage to this young girl, and that at the very altar she discoveredhe had a wife yet alive, though a lunatic. What his subsequent conductand proposals were is a matter of pure conjecture; but when an eventtranspired which rendered inquiry after the governess necessary, it wasdiscovered she was gone—no one could tell when, where, or how. She hadleft Thornfield Hall in the night; every research after her course hadbeen vain: the country had been scoured far and wide; no vestige ofinformation could be gathered respecting her. Yet that she should befound is become a matter of serious urgency: advertisements have beenput in all the papers; I myself have received a letter from one Mr.Briggs, a solicitor, communicating the details I have just imparted. Isit not an odd tale?”“Just tell me this,” said I, “and since you know so much, you surely_can_ tell it me—what of Mr. Rochester? How and where is he? What is hedoing? Is he well?”“I am ignorant of all concerning Mr. Rochester: the letter nevermentions him but to narrate the fraudulent and illegal attempt I haveadverted to. You should rather ask the name of the governess—the natureof the event which requires her appearance.”“Did no one go to Thornfield Hall, then? Did no one see Mr. Rochester?”“I suppose not.”“But they wrote to him?”“Of course.”“And what did he say? Who has his letters?”“Mr. Briggs intimates that the answer to his application was not fromMr. Rochester, but from a lady: it is signed ‘Alice Fairfax.’”I felt cold and dismayed: my worst fears then were probably true: hehad in all probability left England and rushed in reckless desperationto some former haunt on the Continent. And what opiate for his severesufferings—what object for his strong passions—had he sought there? Idared not answer the question. Oh, my poor master—once almost myhusband—whom I had often called “my dear Edward!”“He must have been a bad man,” observed Mr. Rivers.“You don’t know him—don’t pronounce an opinion upon him,” I said, withwarmth.“Very well,” he answered quietly: “and indeed my head is otherwiseoccupied than with him: I have my tale to finish. Since you won’t askthe governess’s name, I must tell it of my own accord. Stay! I have ithere—it is always more satisfactory to see important points writtendown, fairly committed to black and white.”And the pocket-book was again deliberately produced, opened, soughtthrough; from one of its compartments was extracted a shabby slip ofpaper, hastily torn off: I recognised in its texture and its stains ofultra-marine, and lake, and vermillion, the ravished margin of theportrait-cover. He got up, held it close to my eyes: and I read, tracedin Indian ink, in my own handwriting, the words “JANE EYRE”—the workdoubtless of some moment of abstraction.“Briggs wrote to me of a Jane Eyre:” he said, “the advertisementsdemanded a Jane Eyre: I knew a Jane Elliott.—I confess I had mysuspicions, but it was only yesterday afternoon they were at onceresolved into certainty. You own the name and renounce the _alias_?”“Yes—yes; but where is Mr. Briggs? He perhaps knows more of Mr.Rochester than you do.”“Briggs is in London. I should doubt his knowing anything at all aboutMr. Rochester; it is not in Mr. Rochester he is interested. Meantime,you forget essential points in pursuing trifles: you do not inquire whyMr. Briggs sought after you—what he wanted with you.”“Well, what did he want?”“Merely to tell you that your uncle, Mr. Eyre of Madeira, is dead; thathe has left you all his property, and that you are now rich—merelythat—nothing more.”“I!—rich?”“Yes, you, rich—quite an heiress.”Silence succeeded.“You must prove your identity of course,” resumed St. John presently:“a step which will offer no difficulties; you can then enter onimmediate possession. Your fortune is vested in the English funds;Briggs has the will and the necessary documents.”Here was a new card turned up! It is a fine thing, reader, to be liftedin a moment from indigence to wealth—a very fine thing; but not amatter one can comprehend, or consequently enjoy, all at once. And thenthere are other chances in life far more thrilling and rapture-giving:_this_ is solid, an affair of the actual world, nothing ideal about it:all its associations are solid and sober, and its manifestations arethe same. One does not jump, and spring, and shout hurrah! at hearingone has got a fortune; one begins to consider responsibilities, and toponder business; on a base of steady satisfaction rise certain gravecares, and we contain ourselves, and brood over our bliss with a solemnbrow.Besides, the words Legacy, Bequest, go side by side with the words,Death, Funeral. My uncle I had heard was dead—my only relative; eversince being made aware of his existence, I had cherished the hope ofone day seeing him: now, I never should. And then this money came onlyto me: not to me and a rejoicing family, but to my isolated self. Itwas a grand boon doubtless; and independence would be glorious—yes, Ifelt that—_that_ thought swelled my heart.“You unbend your forehead at last,” said Mr. Rivers. “I thought Medusahad looked at you, and that you were turning to stone. Perhaps now youwill ask how much you are worth?”“How much am I worth?”“Oh, a trifle! Nothing of course to speak of—twenty thousand pounds, Ithink they say—but what is that?”“Twenty thousand pounds?”Here was a new stunner—I had been calculating on four or five thousand.This news actually took my breath for a moment: Mr. St. John, whom Ihad never heard laugh before, laughed now.“Well,” said he, “if you had committed a murder, and I had told youyour crime was discovered, you could scarcely look more aghast.”“It is a large sum—don’t you think there is a mistake?”“No mistake at all.”“Perhaps you have read the figures wrong—it may be two thousand!”“It is written in letters, not figures,—twenty thousand.”I again felt rather like an individual of but average gastronomicalpowers sitting down to feast alone at a table spread with provisionsfor a hundred. Mr. Rivers rose now and put his cloak on.“If it were not such a very wild night,” he said, “I would send Hannahdown to keep you company: you look too desperately miserable to be leftalone. But Hannah, poor woman! could not stride the drifts so well asI: her legs are not quite so long: so I must e’en leave you to yoursorrows. Good-night.”He was lifting the latch: a sudden thought occurred to me.“Stop one minute!” I cried.“Well?”“It puzzles me to know why Mr. Briggs wrote to you about me; or how heknew you, or could fancy that you, living in such an out-of-the-wayplace, had the power to aid in my discovery.”“Oh! I am a clergyman,” he said; “and the clergy are often appealed toabout odd matters.” Again the latch rattled.“No; that does not satisfy me!” I exclaimed: and indeed there wassomething in the hasty and unexplanatory reply which, instead ofallaying, piqued my curiosity more than ever.“It is a very strange piece of business,” I added; “I must know moreabout it.”“Another time.”“No; to-night!—to-night!” and as he turned from the door, I placedmyself between it and him. He looked rather embarrassed.“You certainly shall not go till you have told me all,” I said.“I would rather not just now.”“You shall!—you must!”“I would rather Diana or Mary informed you.”Of course these objections wrought my eagerness to a climax: gratifiedit must be, and that without delay; and I told him so.“But I apprised you that I was a hard man,” said he, “difficult topersuade.”“And I am a hard woman,—impossible to put off.”And I am a hard woman,—impossible to put off“And then,” he pursued, “I am cold: no fervour infects me.”“Whereas I am hot, and fire dissolves ice. The blaze there has thawedall the snow from your cloak; by the same token, it has streamed on tomy floor, and made it like a trampled street. As you hope ever to beforgiven, Mr. Rivers, the high crime and misdemeanour of spoiling asanded kitchen, tell me what I wish to know.”“Well, then,” he said, “I yield; if not to your earnestness, to yourperseverance: as stone is worn by continual dropping. Besides, you mustknow some day,—as well now as later. Your name is Jane Eyre?”“Of course: that was all settled before.”“You are not, perhaps, aware that I am your namesake?—that I waschristened St. John Eyre Rivers?”“No, indeed! I remember now seeing the letter E. comprised in yourinitials written in books you have at different times lent me; but Inever asked for what name it stood. But what then? Surely—”I stopped: I could not trust myself to entertain, much less to express,the thought that rushed upon me—that embodied itself,—that, in asecond, stood out a strong, solid probability. Circumstances knitthemselves, fitted themselves, shot into order: the chain that had beenlying hitherto a formless lump of links was drawn out straight,—everyring was perfect, the connection complete. I knew, by instinct, how thematter stood, before St. John had said another word; but I cannotexpect the reader to have the same intuitive perception, so I mustrepeat his explanation.“My mother’s name was Eyre; she had two brothers; one a clergyman, whomarried Miss Jane Reed, of Gateshead; the other, John Eyre, Esq.,merchant, late of Funchal, Madeira. Mr. Briggs, being Mr. Eyre’ssolicitor, wrote to us last August to inform us of our uncle’s death,and to say that he had left his property to his brother the clergyman’sorphan daughter, overlooking us, in consequence of a quarrel, neverforgiven, between him and my father. He wrote again a few weeks since,to intimate that the heiress was lost, and asking if we knew anythingof her. A name casually written on a slip of paper has enabled me tofind her out. You know the rest.” Again he was going, but I set my backagainst the door.“Do let me speak,” I said; “let me have one moment to draw breath andreflect.” I paused—he stood before me, hat in hand, looking composedenough. I resumed—“Your mother was my father’s sister?”“Yes.”“My aunt, consequently?”He bowed.“My uncle John was your uncle John? You, Diana, and Mary are hissister’s children, as I am his brother’s child?”“Undeniably.”“You three, then, are my cousins; half our blood on each side flowsfrom the same source?”“We are cousins; yes.”I surveyed him. It seemed I had found a brother: one I could be proudof,—one I could love; and two sisters, whose qualities were such, that,when I knew them but as mere strangers, they had inspired me withgenuine affection and admiration. The two girls, on whom, kneeling downon the wet ground, and looking through the low, latticed window of MoorHouse kitchen, I had gazed with so bitter a mixture of interest anddespair, were my near kinswomen; and the young and stately gentlemanwho had found me almost dying at his threshold was my blood relation.Glorious discovery to a lonely wretch! This was wealth indeed!—wealthto the heart!—a mine of pure, genial affections. This was a blessing,bright, vivid, and exhilarating;—not like the ponderous gift of gold:rich and welcome enough in its way, but sobering from its weight. I nowclapped my hands in sudden joy—my pulse bounded, my veins thrilled.“Oh, I am glad!—I am glad!” I exclaimed.St. John smiled. “Did I not say you neglected essential points topursue trifles?” he asked. “You were serious when I told you you hadgot a fortune; and now, for a matter of no moment, you are excited.”“What _can_ you mean? It may be of no moment to you; you have sistersand don’t care for a cousin; but I had nobody; and now threerelations,—or two, if you don’t choose to be counted,—are born into myworld full-grown. I say again, I am glad!”I walked fast through the room: I stopped, half suffocated with thethoughts that rose faster than I could receive, comprehend, settlethem:—thoughts of what might, could, would, and should be, and that erelong. I looked at the blank wall: it seemed a sky thick with ascendingstars,—every one lit me to a purpose or delight. Those who had saved mylife, whom, till this hour, I had loved barrenly, I could now benefit.They were under a yoke,—I could free them: they were scattered,—I couldreunite them: the independence, the affluence which was mine, might betheirs too. Were we not four? Twenty thousand pounds shared equallywould be five thousand each, justice—enough and to spare: justice wouldbe done,—mutual happiness secured. Now the wealth did not weigh on me:now it was not a mere bequest of coin,—it was a legacy of life, hope,enjoyment.How I looked while these ideas were taking my spirit by storm, I cannottell; but I perceived soon that Mr. Rivers had placed a chair behindme, and was gently attempting to make me sit down on it. He alsoadvised me to be composed; I scorned the insinuation of helplessnessand distraction, shook off his hand, and began to walk about again.“Write to Diana and Mary to-morrow,” I said, “and tell them to comehome directly. Diana said they would both consider themselves rich witha thousand pounds, so with five thousand they will do very well.”“Tell me where I can get you a glass of water,” said St. John; “youmust really make an effort to tranquillise your feelings.”“Nonsense! and what sort of an effect will the bequest have on you?Will it keep you in England, induce you to marry Miss Oliver, andsettle down like an ordinary mortal?”“You wander: your head becomes confused. I have been too abrupt incommunicating the news; it has excited you beyond your strength.”“Mr. Rivers! you quite put me out of patience: I am rational enough; itis you who misunderstand, or rather who affect to misunderstand.”“Perhaps, if you explained yourself a little more fully, I shouldcomprehend better.”“Explain! What is there to explain? You cannot fail to see that twentythousand pounds, the sum in question, divided equally between thenephew and three nieces of our uncle, will give five thousand to each?What I want is, that you should write to your sisters and tell them ofthe fortune that has accrued to them.”“To you, you mean.”“I have intimated my view of the case: I am incapable of taking anyother. I am not brutally selfish, blindly unjust, or fiendishlyungrateful. Besides, I am resolved I will have a home and connections.I like Moor House, and I will live at Moor House; I like Diana andMary, and I will attach myself for life to Diana and Mary. It wouldplease and benefit me to have five thousand pounds; it would tormentand oppress me to have twenty thousand; which, moreover, could never bemine in justice, though it might in law. I abandon to you, then, whatis absolutely superfluous to me. Let there be no opposition, and nodiscussion about it; let us agree amongst each other, and decide thepoint at once.”“This is acting on first impulses; you must take days to consider sucha matter, ere your word can be regarded as valid.”“Oh! if all you doubt is my sincerity, I am easy: you see the justiceof the case?”“I _do_ see a certain justice; but it is contrary to all custom.Besides, the entire fortune is your right: my uncle gained it by hisown efforts; he was free to leave it to whom he would: he left it toyou. After all, justice permits you to keep it: you may, with a clearconscience, consider it absolutely your own.”“With me,” said I, “it is fully as much a matter of feeling as ofconscience: I must indulge my feelings; I so seldom have had anopportunity of doing so. Were you to argue, object, and annoy me for ayear, I could not forego the delicious pleasure of which I have caughta glimpse—that of repaying, in part, a mighty obligation, and winningto myself lifelong friends.”“You think so now,” rejoined St. John, “because you do not know what itis to possess, nor consequently to enjoy wealth: you cannot form anotion of the importance twenty thousand pounds would give you; of theplace it would enable you to take in society; of the prospects it wouldopen to you: you cannot—”“And you,” I interrupted, “cannot at all imagine the craving I have forfraternal and sisterly love. I never had a home, I never had brothersor sisters; I must and will have them now: you are not reluctant toadmit me and own me, are you?”“Jane, I will be your brother—my sisters will be your sisters—withoutstipulating for this sacrifice of your just rights.”“Brother? Yes; at the distance of a thousand leagues! Sisters? Yes;slaving amongst strangers! I, wealthy—gorged with gold I never earnedand do not merit! You, penniless! Famous equality and fraternisation!Close union! Intimate attachment!”“But, Jane, your aspirations after family ties and domestic happinessmay be realised otherwise than by the means you contemplate: you maymarry.”“Nonsense, again! Marry! I don’t want to marry, and never shall marry.”“That is saying too much: such hazardous affirmations are a proof ofthe excitement under which you labour.”“It is not saying too much: I know what I feel, and how averse are myinclinations to the bare thought of marriage. No one would take me forlove; and I will not be regarded in the light of a mere moneyspeculation. And I do not want a stranger—unsympathising, alien,different from me; I want my kindred: those with whom I have fullfellow-feeling. Say again you will be my brother: when you uttered thewords I was satisfied, happy; repeat them, if you can, repeat themsincerely.”“I think I can. I know I have always loved my own sisters; and I knowon what my affection for them is grounded,—respect for their worth andadmiration of their talents. You too have principle and mind: yourtastes and habits resemble Diana’s and Mary’s; your presence is alwaysagreeable to me; in your conversation I have already for some timefound a salutary solace. I feel I can easily and naturally make room inmy heart for you, as my third and youngest sister.”“Thank you: that contents me for to-night. Now you had better go; forif you stay longer, you will perhaps irritate me afresh by somemistrustful scruple.”“And the school, Miss Eyre? It must now be shut up, I suppose?”“No. I will retain my post of mistress till you get a substitute.”He smiled approbation: we shook hands, and he took leave.I need not narrate in detail the further struggles I had, and argumentsI used, to get matters regarding the legacy settled as I wished. Mytask was a very hard one; but, as I was absolutely resolved—as mycousins saw at length that my mind was really and immutably fixed onmaking a just division of the property—as they must in their own heartshave felt the equity of the intention; and must, besides, have beeninnately conscious that in my place they would have done precisely whatI wished to do—they yielded at length so far as to consent to put theaffair to arbitration. The judges chosen were Mr. Oliver and an ablelawyer: both coincided in my opinion: I carried my point. Theinstruments of transfer were drawn out: St. John, Diana, Mary, and I,each became possessed of a competency.CHAPTER XXXIVIt was near Christmas by the time all was settled: the season ofgeneral holiday approached. I now closed Morton school, taking carethat the parting should not be barren on my side. Good fortune opensthe hand as well as the heart wonderfully; and to give somewhat when wehave largely received, is but to afford a vent to the unusualebullition of the sensations. I had long felt with pleasure that manyof my rustic scholars liked me, and when we parted, that consciousnesswas confirmed: they manifested their affection plainly and strongly.Deep was my gratification to find I had really a place in theirunsophisticated hearts: I promised them that never a week should passin future that I did not visit them, and give them an hour’s teachingin their school.Mr. Rivers came up as, having seen the classes, now numbering sixtygirls, file out before me, and locked the door, I stood with the key inmy hand, exchanging a few words of special farewell with somehalf-dozen of my best scholars: as decent, respectable, modest, andwell-informed young women as could be found in the ranks of the Britishpeasantry. And that is saying a great deal; for after all, the Britishpeasantry are the best taught, best mannered, most self-respecting ofany in Europe: since those days I have seen paysannes and Bäuerinnen;and the best of them seemed to me ignorant, coarse, and besotted,compared with my Morton girls.“Do you consider you have got your reward for a season of exertion?”asked Mr. Rivers, when they were gone. “Does not the consciousness ofhaving done some real good in your day and generation give pleasure?”“Doubtless.”“And you have only toiled a few months! Would not a life devoted to thetask of regenerating your race be well spent?”“Yes,” I said; “but I could not go on for ever so: I want to enjoy myown faculties as well as to cultivate those of other people. I mustenjoy them now; don’t recall either my mind or body to the school; I amout of it and disposed for full holiday.”He looked grave. “What now? What sudden eagerness is this you evince?What are you going to do?”“To be active: as active as I can. And first I must beg you to setHannah at liberty, and get somebody else to wait on you.”“Do you want her?”“Yes, to go with me to Moor House. Diana and Mary will be at home in aweek, and I want to have everything in order against their arrival.”“I understand. I thought you were for flying off on some excursion. Itis better so: Hannah shall go with you.”“Tell her to be ready by to-morrow then; and here is the schoolroomkey: I will give you the key of my cottage in the morning.”He took it. “You give it up very gleefully,” said he; “I don’t quiteunderstand your light-heartedness, because I cannot tell whatemployment you propose to yourself as a substitute for the one you arerelinquishing. What aim, what purpose, what ambition in life have younow?”“My first aim will be to _clean down_ (do you comprehend the full forceof the expression?)—to _clean down_ Moor House from chamber to cellar;my next to rub it up with bees-wax, oil, and an indefinite number ofcloths, till it glitters again; my third, to arrange every chair,table, bed, carpet, with mathematical precision; afterwards I shall gonear to ruin you in coals and peat to keep up good fires in every room;and lastly, the two days preceding that on which your sisters areexpected will be devoted by Hannah and me to such a beating of eggs,sorting of currants, grating of spices, compounding of Christmas cakes,chopping up of materials for mince-pies, and solemnising of otherculinary rites, as words can convey but an inadequate notion of to theuninitiated like you. My purpose, in short, is to have all things in anabsolutely perfect state of readiness for Diana and Mary before nextThursday; and my ambition is to give them a beau-ideal of a welcomewhen they come.”St. John smiled slightly: still he was dissatisfied.“It is all very well for the present,” said he; “but seriously, I trustthat when the first flush of vivacity is over, you will look a littlehigher than domestic endearments and household joys.”“The best things the world has!” I interrupted.“No, Jane, no: this world is not the scene of fruition; do not attemptto make it so: nor of rest; do not turn slothful.”“I mean, on the contrary, to be busy.”“Jane, I excuse you for the present: two months’ grace I allow you forthe full enjoyment of your new position, and for pleasing yourself withthis late-found charm of relationship; but _then_, I hope you willbegin to look beyond Moor House and Morton, and sisterly society, andthe selfish calm and sensual comfort of civilised affluence. I hopeyour energies will then once more trouble you with their strength.”I looked at him with surprise. “St. John,” I said, “I think you arealmost wicked to talk so. I am disposed to be as content as a queen,and you try to stir me up to restlessness! To what end?”“To the end of turning to profit the talents which God has committed toyour keeping; and of which He will surely one day demand a strictaccount. Jane, I shall watch you closely and anxiously—I warn you ofthat. And try to restrain the disproportionate fervour with which youthrow yourself into commonplace home pleasures. Don’t cling sotenaciously to ties of the flesh; save your constancy and ardour for anadequate cause; forbear to waste them on trite transient objects. Doyou hear, Jane?”“Yes; just as if you were speaking Greek. I feel I have adequate causeto be happy, and I _will_ be happy. Goodbye!”Happy at Moor House I was, and hard I worked; and so did Hannah: shewas charmed to see how jovial I could be amidst the bustle of a houseturned topsy-turvy—how I could brush, and dust, and clean, and cook.And really, after a day or two of confusion worse confounded, it wasdelightful by degrees to invoke order from the chaos ourselves hadmade. I had previously taken a journey to S—— to purchase some newfurniture: my cousins having given me _carte blanche_ to effect whatalterations I pleased, and a sum having been set aside for thatpurpose. The ordinary sitting-room and bedrooms I left much as theywere: for I knew Diana and Mary would derive more pleasure from seeingagain the old homely tables, and chairs, and beds, than from thespectacle of the smartest innovations. Still some novelty wasnecessary, to give to their return the piquancy with which I wished itto be invested. Dark handsome new carpets and curtains, an arrangementof some carefully selected antique ornaments in porcelain and bronze,new coverings, and mirrors, and dressing-cases, for the toilet tables,answered the end: they looked fresh without being glaring. A spareparlour and bedroom I refurnished entirely, with old mahogany andcrimson upholstery: I laid canvas on the passage, and carpets on thestairs. When all was finished, I thought Moor House as complete a modelof bright modest snugness within, as it was, at this season, a specimenof wintry waste and desert dreariness without.The eventful Thursday at length came. They were expected about dark,and ere dusk fires were lit upstairs and below; the kitchen was inperfect trim; Hannah and I were dressed, and all was in readiness.St. John arrived first. I had entreated him to keep quite clear of thehouse till everything was arranged: and, indeed, the bare idea of thecommotion, at once sordid and trivial, going on within its wallssufficed to scare him to estrangement. He found me in the kitchen,watching the progress of certain cakes for tea, then baking.Approaching the hearth, he asked, “If I was at last satisfied withhousemaid’s work?” I answered by inviting him to accompany me on ageneral inspection of the result of my labours. With some difficulty, Igot him to make the tour of the house. He just looked in at the doors Iopened; and when he had wandered upstairs and downstairs, he said Imust have gone through a great deal of fatigue and trouble to haveeffected such considerable changes in so short a time: but not asyllable did he utter indicating pleasure in the improved aspect of hisabode.This silence damped me. I thought perhaps the alterations had disturbedsome old associations he valued. I inquired whether this was the case:no doubt in a somewhat crest-fallen tone.“Not at all; he had, on the contrary, remarked that I had scrupulouslyrespected every association: he feared, indeed, I must have bestowedmore thought on the matter than it was worth. How many minutes, forinstance, had I devoted to studying the arrangement of this veryroom?—By-the-bye, could I tell him where such a book was?”I showed him the volume on the shelf: he took it down, and withdrawingto his accustomed window recess, he began to read it.Now, I did not like this, reader. St. John was a good man; but I beganto feel he had spoken truth of himself when he said he was hard andcold. The humanities and amenities of life had no attraction forhim—its peaceful enjoyments no charm. Literally, he lived only toaspire—after what was good and great, certainly; but still he wouldnever rest, nor approve of others resting round him. As I looked at hislofty forehead, still and pale as a white stone—at his fine lineamentsfixed in study—I comprehended all at once that he would hardly make agood husband: that it would be a trying thing to be his wife. Iunderstood, as by inspiration, the nature of his love for Miss Oliver;I agreed with him that it was but a love of the senses. I comprehendedhow he should despise himself for the feverish influence it exercisedover him; how he should wish to stifle and destroy it; how he shouldmistrust its ever conducting permanently to his happiness or hers. Isaw he was of the material from which nature hews her heroes—Christianand Pagan—her lawgivers, her statesmen, her conquerors: a steadfastbulwark for great interests to rest upon; but, at the fireside, toooften a cold cumbrous column, gloomy and out of place.“This parlour is not his sphere,” I reflected: “the Himalayan ridge orCaffre bush, even the plague-cursed Guinea Coast swamp would suit himbetter. Well may he eschew the calm of domestic life; it is not hiselement: there his faculties stagnate—they cannot develop or appear toadvantage. It is in scenes of strife and danger—where courage isproved, and energy exercised, and fortitude tasked—that he will speakand move, the leader and superior. A merry child would have theadvantage of him on this hearth. He is right to choose a missionary’scareer—I see it now.”“They are coming! they are coming!” cried Hannah, throwing open theparlour door. At the same moment old Carlo barked joyfully. Out I ran.It was now dark; but a rumbling of wheels was audible. Hannah soon hada lantern lit. The vehicle had stopped at the wicket; the driver openedthe door: first one well-known form, then another, stepped out. In aminute I had my face under their bonnets, in contact first with Mary’ssoft cheek, then with Diana’s flowing curls. They laughed—kissedme—then Hannah: patted Carlo, who was half wild with delight; askedeagerly if all was well; and being assured in the affirmative, hastenedinto the house.They were stiff with their long and jolting drive from Whitcross, andchilled with the frosty night air; but their pleasant countenancesexpanded to the cheerful firelight. While the driver and Hannah broughtin the boxes, they demanded St. John. At this moment he advanced fromthe parlour. They both threw their arms round his neck at once. He gaveeach one quiet kiss, said in a low tone a few words of welcome, stood awhile to be talked to, and then, intimating that he supposed they wouldsoon rejoin him in the parlour, withdrew there as to a place of refuge.I had lit their candles to go upstairs, but Diana had first to givehospitable orders respecting the driver; this done, both followed me.They were delighted with the renovation and decorations of their rooms;with the new drapery, and fresh carpets, and rich tinted china vases:they expressed their gratification ungrudgingly. I had the pleasure offeeling that my arrangements met their wishes exactly, and that what Ihad done added a vivid charm to their joyous return home.Sweet was that evening. My cousins, full of exhilaration, were soeloquent in narrative and comment, that their fluency covered St.John’s taciturnity: he was sincerely glad to see his sisters; but intheir glow of fervour and flow of joy he could not sympathise. Theevent of the day—that is, the return of Diana and Mary—pleased him; butthe accompaniments of that event, the glad tumult, the garrulous gleeof reception irked him: I saw he wished the calmer morrow was come. Inthe very meridian of the night’s enjoyment, about an hour after tea, arap was heard at the door. Hannah entered with the intimation that “apoor lad was come, at that unlikely time, to fetch Mr. Rivers to seehis mother, who was drawing away.”“Where does she live, Hannah?”“Clear up at Whitcross Brow, almost four miles off, and moor and mossall the way.”“Tell him I will go.”“I’m sure, sir, you had better not. It’s the worst road to travel afterdark that can be: there’s no track at all over the bog. And then it issuch a bitter night—the keenest wind you ever felt. You had better sendword, sir, that you will be there in the morning.”But he was already in the passage, putting on his cloak; and withoutone objection, one murmur, he departed. It was then nine o’clock: hedid not return till midnight. Starved and tired enough he was: but helooked happier than when he set out. He had performed an act of duty;made an exertion; felt his own strength to do and deny, and was onbetter terms with himself.I am afraid the whole of the ensuing week tried his patience. It wasChristmas week: we took to no settled employment, but spent it in asort of merry domestic dissipation. The air of the moors, the freedomof home, the dawn of prosperity, acted on Diana and Mary’s spirits likesome life-giving elixir: they were gay from morning till noon, and fromnoon till night. They could always talk; and their discourse, witty,pithy, original, had such charms for me, that I preferred listening to,and sharing in it, to doing anything else. St. John did not rebuke ourvivacity; but he escaped from it: he was seldom in the house; hisparish was large, the population scattered, and he found daily businessin visiting the sick and poor in its different districts.One morning at breakfast, Diana, after looking a little pensive forsome minutes, asked him, “If his plans were yet unchanged.”“Unchanged and unchangeable,” was the reply. And he proceeded to informus that his departure from England was now definitively fixed for theensuing year.“And Rosamond Oliver?” suggested Mary, the words seeming to escape herlips involuntarily: for no sooner had she uttered them, than she made agesture as if wishing to recall them. St. John had a book in hishand—it was his unsocial custom to read at meals—he closed it, andlooked up.“Rosamond Oliver,” said he, “is about to be married to Mr. Granby, oneof the best connected and most estimable residents in S——, grandson andheir to Sir Frederic Granby: I had the intelligence from her fatheryesterday.”His sisters looked at each other and at me; we all three looked at him:he was serene as glass.“The match must have been got up hastily,” said Diana: “they cannothave known each other long.”“But two months: they met in October at the county ball at S——. Butwhere there are no obstacles to a union, as in the present case, wherethe connection is in every point desirable, delays are unnecessary:they will be married as soon as S—— Place, which Sir Frederic gives upto them, can be refitted for their reception.”The first time I found St. John alone after this communication, I felttempted to inquire if the event distressed him: but he seemed so littleto need sympathy, that, so far from venturing to offer him more, Iexperienced some shame at the recollection of what I had alreadyhazarded. Besides, I was out of practice in talking to him: his reservewas again frozen over, and my frankness was congealed beneath it. Hehad not kept his promise of treating me like his sisters; hecontinually made little chilling differences between us, which did notat all tend to the development of cordiality: in short, now that I wasacknowledged his kinswoman, and lived under the same roof with him, Ifelt the distance between us to be far greater than when he had knownme only as the village schoolmistress. When I remembered how far I hadonce been admitted to his confidence, I could hardly comprehend hispresent frigidity.Such being the case, I felt not a little surprised when he raised hishead suddenly from the desk over which he was stooping, and said—“You see, Jane, the battle is fought and the victory won.”Startled at being thus addressed, I did not immediately reply: after amoment’s hesitation I answered—“But are you sure you are not in the position of those conquerors whosetriumphs have cost them too dear? Would not such another ruin you?”“I think not; and if I were, it does not much signify; I shall never becalled upon to contend for such another. The event of the conflict isdecisive: my way is now clear; I thank God for it!” So saying, hereturned to his papers and his silence.As our mutual happiness (_i.e._, Diana’s, Mary’s, and mine) settledinto a quieter character, and we resumed our usual habits and regularstudies, St. John stayed more at home: he sat with us in the same room,sometimes for hours together. While Mary drew, Diana pursued a courseof encyclopædic reading she had (to my awe and amazement) undertaken,and I fagged away at German, he pondered a mystic lore of his own: thatof some Eastern tongue, the acquisition of which he thought necessaryto his plans.Thus engaged, he appeared, sitting in his own recess, quiet andabsorbed enough; but that blue eye of his had a habit of leaving theoutlandish-looking grammar, and wandering over, and sometimes fixingupon us, his fellow-students, with a curious intensity of observation:if caught, it would be instantly withdrawn; yet ever and anon, itreturned searchingly to our table. I wondered what it meant: Iwondered, too, at the punctual satisfaction he never failed to exhibiton an occasion that seemed to me of small moment, namely, my weeklyvisit to Morton school; and still more was I puzzled when, if the daywas unfavourable, if there was snow, or rain, or high wind, and hissisters urged me not to go, he would invariably make light of theirsolicitude, and encourage me to accomplish the task without regard tothe elements.“Jane is not such a weakling as you would make her,” he would say: “shecan bear a mountain blast, or a shower, or a few flakes of snow, aswell as any of us. Her constitution is both sound and elastic;—bettercalculated to endure variations of climate than many more robust.”And when I returned, sometimes a good deal tired, and not a littleweather-beaten, I never dared complain, because I saw that to murmurwould be to vex him: on all occasions fortitude pleased him; thereverse was a special annoyance.One afternoon, however, I got leave to stay at home, because I reallyhad a cold. His sisters were gone to Morton in my stead: I sat readingSchiller; he, deciphering his crabbed Oriental scrolls. As I exchangeda translation for an exercise, I happened to look his way: there Ifound myself under the influence of the ever-watchful blue eye. Howlong it had been searching me through and through, and over and over, Icannot tell: so keen was it, and yet so cold, I felt for the momentsuperstitious—as if I were sitting in the room with something uncanny.“Jane, what are you doing?”“Learning German.”“I want you to give up German and learn Hindostanee.”“You are not in earnest?”“In such earnest that I must have it so: and I will tell you why.”He then went on to explain that Hindostanee was the language he washimself at present studying; that, as he advanced, he was apt to forgetthe commencement; that it would assist him greatly to have a pupil withwhom he might again and again go over the elements, and so fix themthoroughly in his mind; that his choice had hovered for some timebetween me and his sisters; but that he had fixed on me because he sawI could sit at a task the longest of the three. Would I do him thisfavour? I should not, perhaps, have to make the sacrifice long, as itwanted now barely three months to his departure.St. John was not a man to be lightly refused: you felt that everyimpression made on him, either for pain or pleasure, was deep-gravedand permanent. I consented. When Diana and Mary returned, the formerfound her scholar transferred from her to her brother: she laughed, andboth she and Mary agreed that St. John should never have persuaded themto such a step. He answered quietly—“I know it.”I found him a very patient, very forbearing, and yet an exactingmaster: he expected me to do a great deal; and when I fulfilled hisexpectations, he, in his own way, fully testified his approbation. Bydegrees, he acquired a certain influence over me that took away myliberty of mind: his praise and notice were more restraining than hisindifference. I could no longer talk or laugh freely when he was by,because a tiresomely importunate instinct reminded me that vivacity (atleast in me) was distasteful to him. I was so fully aware that onlyserious moods and occupations were acceptable, that in his presenceevery effort to sustain or follow any other became vain: I fell under afreezing spell. When he said “go,” I went; “come,” I came; “do this,” Idid it. But I did not love my servitude: I wished, many a time, he hadcontinued to neglect me.One evening when, at bedtime, his sisters and I stood round him,bidding him good-night, he kissed each of them, as was his custom; and,as was equally his custom, he gave me his hand. Diana, who chanced tobe in a frolicsome humour (_she_ was not painfully controlled by hiswill; for hers, in another way, was as strong), exclaimed—“St. John! you used to call Jane your third sister, but you don’t treather as such: you should kiss her too.”She pushed me towards him. I thought Diana very provoking, and feltuncomfortably confused; and while I was thus thinking and feeling, St.John bent his head; his Greek face was brought to a level with mine,his eyes questioned my eyes piercingly—he kissed me. There are no suchthings as marble kisses or ice kisses, or I should say myecclesiastical cousin’s salute belonged to one of these classes; butthere may be experiment kisses, and his was an experiment kiss. Whengiven, he viewed me to learn the result; it was not striking: I am sureI did not blush; perhaps I might have turned a little pale, for I feltas if this kiss were a seal affixed to my fetters. He never omitted theceremony afterwards, and the gravity and quiescence with which Iunderwent it, seemed to invest it for him with a certain charm.As for me, I daily wished more to please him; but to do so, I feltdaily more and more that I must disown half my nature, stifle half myfaculties, wrest my tastes from their original bent, force myself tothe adoption of pursuits for which I had no natural vocation. He wantedto train me to an elevation I could never reach; it racked me hourly toaspire to the standard he uplifted. The thing was as impossible as tomould my irregular features to his correct and classic pattern, to giveto my changeable green eyes the sea-blue tint and solemn lustre of hisown.Not his ascendancy alone, however, held me in thrall at present. Oflate it had been easy enough for me to look sad: a cankering evil satat my heart and drained my happiness at its source—the evil ofsuspense.Perhaps you think I had forgotten Mr. Rochester, reader, amidst thesechanges of place and fortune. Not for a moment. His idea was still withme, because it was not a vapour sunshine could disperse, nor asand-traced effigy storms could wash away; it was a name graven on atablet, fated to last as long as the marble it inscribed. The cravingto know what had become of him followed me everywhere; when I was atMorton, I re-entered my cottage every evening to think of that; and nowat Moor House, I sought my bedroom each night to brood over it.In the course of my necessary correspondence with Mr. Briggs about thewill, I had inquired if he knew anything of Mr. Rochester’s presentresidence and state of health; but, as St. John had conjectured, he wasquite ignorant of all concerning him. I then wrote to Mrs. Fairfax,entreating information on the subject. I had calculated with certaintyon this step answering my end: I felt sure it would elicit an earlyanswer. I was astonished when a fortnight passed without reply; butwhen two months wore away, and day after day the post arrived andbrought nothing for me, I fell a prey to the keenest anxiety.I wrote again: there was a chance of my first letter having missed.Renewed hope followed renewed effort: it shone like the former for someweeks, then, like it, it faded, flickered: not a line, not a wordreached me. When half a year wasted in vain expectancy, my hope diedout, and then I felt dark indeed.A fine spring shone round me, which I could not enjoy. Summerapproached; Diana tried to cheer me: she said I looked ill, and wishedto accompany me to the sea-side. This St. John opposed; he said I didnot want dissipation, I wanted employment; my present life was toopurposeless, I required an aim; and, I suppose, by way of supplyingdeficiencies, he prolonged still further my lessons in Hindostanee, andgrew more urgent in requiring their accomplishment: and I, like a fool,never thought of resisting him—I could not resist him.One day I had come to my studies in lower spirits than usual; the ebbwas occasioned by a poignantly felt disappointment. Hannah had told mein the morning there was a letter for me, and when I went down to takeit, almost certain that the long-looked for tidings were vouchsafed meat last, I found only an unimportant note from Mr. Briggs on business.The bitter check had wrung from me some tears; and now, as I sat poringover the crabbed characters and flourishing tropes of an Indian scribe,my eyes filled again.St. John called me to his side to read; in attempting to do this myvoice failed me: words were lost in sobs. He and I were the onlyoccupants of the parlour: Diana was practising her music in thedrawing-room, Mary was gardening—it was a very fine May day, clear,sunny, and breezy. My companion expressed no surprise at this emotion,nor did he question me as to its cause; he only said—“We will wait a few minutes, Jane, till you are more composed.” Andwhile I smothered the paroxysm with all haste, he sat calm and patient,leaning on his desk, and looking like a physician watching with the eyeof science an expected and fully understood crisis in a patient’smalady. Having stifled my sobs, wiped my eyes, and muttered somethingabout not being very well that morning, I resumed my task, andsucceeded in completing it. St. John put away my books and his, lockedhis desk, and said—“Now, Jane, you shall take a walk; and with me.”“I will call Diana and Mary.”“No; I want only one companion this morning, and that must be you. Puton your things; go out by the kitchen-door: take the road towards thehead of Marsh Glen: I will join you in a moment.”I know no medium: I never in my life have known any medium in mydealings with positive, hard characters, antagonistic to my own,between absolute submission and determined revolt. I have alwaysfaithfully observed the one, up to the very moment of bursting,sometimes with volcanic vehemence, into the other; and as neitherpresent circumstances warranted, nor my present mood inclined me tomutiny, I observed careful obedience to St. John’s directions; and inten minutes I was treading the wild track of the glen, side by sidewith him.The breeze was from the west: it came over the hills, sweet with scentsof heath and rush; the sky was of stainless blue; the stream descendingthe ravine, swelled with past spring rains, poured along plentiful andclear, catching golden gleams from the sun, and sapphire tints from thefirmament. As we advanced and left the track, we trod a soft turf,mossy fine and emerald green, minutely enamelled with a tiny whiteflower, and spangled with a star-like yellow blossom: the hills,meantime, shut us quite in; for the glen, towards its head, wound totheir very core.“Let us rest here,” said St. John, as we reached the first stragglersof a battalion of rocks, guarding a sort of pass, beyond which the beckrushed down a waterfall; and where, still a little farther, themountain shook off turf and flower, had only heath for raiment and cragfor gem—where it exaggerated the wild to the savage, and exchanged thefresh for the frowning—where it guarded the forlorn hope of solitude,and a last refuge for silence.I took a seat: St. John stood near me. He looked up the pass and downthe hollow; his glance wandered away with the stream, and returned totraverse the unclouded heaven which coloured it: he removed his hat,let the breeze stir his hair and kiss his brow. He seemed in communionwith the genius of the haunt: with his eye he bade farewell tosomething.“And I shall see it again,” he said aloud, “in dreams when I sleep bythe Ganges: and again in a more remote hour—when another slumberovercomes me—on the shore of a darker stream!”Strange words of a strange love! An austere patriot’s passion for hisfatherland! He sat down; for half-an-hour we never spoke; neither he tome nor I to him: that interval past, he recommenced—“Jane, I go in six weeks; I have taken my berth in an East Indiamanwhich sails on the 20th of June.”“God will protect you; for you have undertaken His work,” I answered.“Yes,” said he, “there is my glory and joy. I am the servant of aninfallible Master. I am not going out under human guidance, subject tothe defective laws and erring control of my feeble fellow-worms: myking, my lawgiver, my captain, is the All-perfect. It seems strange tome that all round me do not burn to enlist under the same banner,—tojoin in the same enterprise.”“All have not your powers, and it would be folly for the feeble to wishto march with the strong.”“I do not speak to the feeble, or think of them: I address only such asare worthy of the work, and competent to accomplish it.”“Those are few in number, and difficult to discover.”“You say truly; but when found, it is right to stir them up—to urge andexhort them to the effort—to show them what their gifts are, and whythey were given—to speak Heaven’s message in their ear,—to offer them,direct from God, a place in the ranks of His chosen.”“If they are really qualified for the task, will not their own heartsbe the first to inform them of it?”I felt as if an awful charm was framing round and gathering over me: Itrembled to hear some fatal word spoken which would at once declare andrivet the spell.“And what does _your_ heart say?” demanded St. John.“My heart is mute,—my heart is mute,” I answered, struck and thrilled.“Then I must speak for it,” continued the deep, relentless voice.“Jane, come with me to India: come as my helpmeet and fellow-labourer.”The glen and sky spun round: the hills heaved! It was as if I had hearda summons from Heaven—as if a visionary messenger, like him ofMacedonia, had enounced, “Come over and help us!” But I was noapostle,—I could not behold the herald,—I could not receive his call.“Oh, St. John!” I cried, “have some mercy!”I appealed to one who, in the discharge of what he believed his duty,knew neither mercy nor remorse. He continued—“God and nature intended you for a missionary’s wife. It is notpersonal, but mental endowments they have given you: you are formed forlabour, not for love. A missionary’s wife you must—shall be. You shallbe mine: I claim you—not for my pleasure, but for my Sovereign’sservice.”“I am not fit for it: I have no vocation,” I said.He had calculated on these first objections: he was not irritated bythem. Indeed, as he leaned back against the crag behind him, folded hisarms on his chest, and fixed his countenance, I saw he was prepared fora long and trying opposition, and had taken in a stock of patience tolast him to its close—resolved, however, that that close should beconquest for him.“Humility, Jane,” said he, “is the groundwork of Christian virtues: yousay right that you are not fit for the work. Who is fit for it? Or who,that ever was truly called, believed himself worthy of the summons? I,for instance, am but dust and ashes. With St. Paul, I acknowledgemyself the chiefest of sinners; but I do not suffer this sense of mypersonal vileness to daunt me. I know my Leader: that He is just aswell as mighty; and while He has chosen a feeble instrument to performa great task, He will, from the boundless stores of His providence,supply the inadequacy of the means to the end. Think like me,Jane—trust like me. It is the Rock of Ages I ask you to lean on: do notdoubt but it will bear the weight of your human weakness.”“I do not understand a missionary life: I have never studied missionarylabours.”“There I, humble as I am, can give you the aid you want: I can set youyour task from hour to hour; stand by you always; help you from momentto moment. This I could do in the beginning: soon (for I know yourpowers) you would be as strong and apt as myself, and would not requiremy help.”“But my powers—where are they for this undertaking? I do not feel them.Nothing speaks or stirs in me while you talk. I am sensible of no lightkindling—no life quickening—no voice counselling or cheering. Oh, Iwish I could make you see how much my mind is at this moment like arayless dungeon, with one shrinking fear fettered in its depths—thefear of being persuaded by you to attempt what I cannot accomplish!”“I have an answer for you—hear it. I have watched you ever since wefirst met: I have made you my study for ten months. I have proved youin that time by sundry tests: and what have I seen and elicited? In thevillage school I found you could perform well, punctually, uprightly,labour uncongenial to your habits and inclinations; I saw you couldperform it with capacity and tact: you could win while you controlled.In the calm with which you learnt you had become suddenly rich, I reada mind clear of the vice of Demas:—lucre had no undue power over you.In the resolute readiness with which you cut your wealth into fourshares, keeping but one to yourself, and relinquishing the three othersto the claim of abstract justice, I recognised a soul that revelled inthe flame and excitement of sacrifice. In the tractability with which,at my wish, you forsook a study in which you were interested, andadopted another because it interested me; in the untiring assiduitywith which you have since persevered in it—in the unflagging energy andunshaken temper with which you have met its difficulties—I acknowledgethe complement of the qualities I seek. Jane, you are docile, diligent,disinterested, faithful, constant, and courageous; very gentle, andvery heroic: cease to mistrust yourself—I can trust you unreservedly.As a conductress of Indian schools, and a helper amongst Indian women,your assistance will be to me invaluable.”My iron shroud contracted round me; persuasion advanced with slow surestep. Shut my eyes as I would, these last words of his succeeded inmaking the way, which had seemed blocked up, comparatively clear. Mywork, which had appeared so vague, so hopelessly diffuse, condenseditself as he proceeded, and assumed a definite form under his shapinghand. He waited for an answer. I demanded a quarter of an hour tothink, before I again hazarded a reply.“Very willingly,” he rejoined; and rising, he strode a little distanceup the pass, threw himself down on a swell of heath, and there laystill.He threw himself down on a swell of heath, and there lay still“I _can_ do what he wants me to do: I am forced to see and acknowledgethat,” I meditated,—“that is, if life be spared me. But I feel mine isnot the existence to be long protracted under an Indian sun. What then?He does not care for that: when my time came to die, he would resignme, in all serenity and sanctity, to the God who gave me. The case isvery plain before me. In leaving England, I should leave a loved butempty land—Mr. Rochester is not there; and if he were, what is, whatcan that ever be to me? My business is to live without him now: nothingso absurd, so weak as to drag on from day to day, as if I were waitingsome impossible change in circumstances, which might reunite me to him.Of course (as St. John once said) I must seek another interest in lifeto replace the one lost: is not the occupation he now offers me trulythe most glorious man can adopt or God assign? Is it not, by its noblecares and sublime results, the one best calculated to fill the voidleft by uptorn affections and demolished hopes? I believe I must say,Yes—and yet I shudder. Alas! If I join St. John, I abandon half myself:if I go to India, I go to premature death. And how will the intervalbetween leaving England for India, and India for the grave, be filled?Oh, I know well! That, too, is very clear to my vision. By straining tosatisfy St. John till my sinews ache, I _shall_ satisfy him—to thefinest central point and farthest outward circle of his expectations.If I _do_ go with him—if I _do_ make the sacrifice he urges, I willmake it absolutely: I will throw all on the altar—heart, vitals, theentire victim. He will never love me; but he shall approve me; I willshow him energies he has not yet seen, resources he has neversuspected. Yes, I can work as hard as he can, and with as littlegrudging.“Consent, then, to his demand is possible: but for one item—onedreadful item. It is—that he asks me to be his wife, and has no more ofa husband’s heart for me than that frowning giant of a rock, down whichthe stream is foaming in yonder gorge. He prizes me as a soldier woulda good weapon; and that is all. Unmarried to him, this would nevergrieve me; but can I let him complete his calculations—coolly put intopractice his plans—go through the wedding ceremony? Can I receive fromhim the bridal ring, endure all the forms of love (which I doubt not hewould scrupulously observe) and know that the spirit was quite absent?Can I bear the consciousness that every endearment he bestows is asacrifice made on principle? No: such a martyrdom would be monstrous. Iwill never undergo it. As his sister, I might accompany him—not as hiswife: I will tell him so.”I looked towards the knoll: there he lay, still as a prostrate column;his face turned to me: his eye beaming watchful and keen. He started tohis feet and approached me.“I am ready to go to India, if I may go free.”“Your answer requires a commentary,” he said; “it is not clear.”“You have hitherto been my adopted brother—I, your adopted sister: letus continue as such: you and I had better not marry.”He shook his head. “Adopted fraternity will not do in this case. If youwere my real sister it would be different: I should take you, and seekno wife. But as it is, either our union must be consecrated and sealedby marriage, or it cannot exist: practical obstacles oppose themselvesto any other plan. Do you not see it, Jane? Consider a moment—yourstrong sense will guide you.”I did consider; and still my sense, such as it was, directed me only tothe fact that we did not love each other as man and wife should: andtherefore it inferred we ought not to marry. I said so. “St. John,” Ireturned, “I regard you as a brother—you, me as a sister: so let uscontinue.”“We cannot—we cannot,” he answered, with short, sharp determination:“it would not do. You have said you will go with me to India:remember—you have said that.”“Conditionally.”“Well—well. To the main point—the departure with me from England, theco-operation with me in my future labours—you do not object. You havealready as good as put your hand to the plough: you are too consistentto withdraw it. You have but one end to keep in view—how the work youhave undertaken can best be done. Simplify your complicated interests,feelings, thoughts, wishes, aims; merge all considerations in onepurpose: that of fulfilling with effect—with power—the mission of yourgreat Master. To do so, you must have a coadjutor: not a brother—thatis a loose tie—but a husband. I, too, do not want a sister: a sistermight any day be taken from me. I want a wife: the sole helpmeet I caninfluence efficiently in life, and retain absolutely till death.”I shuddered as he spoke: I felt his influence in my marrow—his hold onmy limbs.“Seek one elsewhere than in me, St. John: seek one fitted to you.”“One fitted to my purpose, you mean—fitted to my vocation. Again I tellyou it is not the insignificant private individual—the mere man, withthe man’s selfish senses—I wish to mate: it is the missionary.”“And I will give the missionary my energies—it is all he wants—but notmyself: that would be only adding the husk and shell to the kernel. Forthem he has no use: I retain them.”“You cannot—you ought not. Do you think God will be satisfied with halfan oblation? Will He accept a mutilated sacrifice? It is the cause ofGod I advocate: it is under His standard I enlist you. I cannot accepton His behalf a divided allegiance: it must be entire.”“Oh! I will give my heart to God,” I said. “_You_ do not want it.”I will not swear, reader, that there was not something of repressedsarcasm both in the tone in which I uttered this sentence, and in thefeeling that accompanied it. I had silently feared St. John till now,because I had not understood him. He had held me in awe, because he hadheld me in doubt. How much of him was saint, how much mortal, I couldnot heretofore tell: but revelations were being made in thisconference: the analysis of his nature was proceeding before my eyes. Isaw his fallibilities: I comprehended them. I understood that, sittingthere where I did, on the bank of heath, and with that handsome formbefore me, I sat at the feet of a man, erring as I. The veil fell fromhis hardness and despotism. Having felt in him the presence of thesequalities, I felt his imperfection and took courage. I was with anequal—one with whom I might argue—one whom, if I saw good, I mightresist.He was silent after I had uttered the last sentence, and I presentlyrisked an upward glance at his countenance. His eye, bent on me,expressed at once stern surprise and keen inquiry. “Is she sarcastic,and sarcastic to _me!_” it seemed to say. “What does this signify?”“Do not let us forget that this is a solemn matter,” he said ere long;“one of which we may neither think nor talk lightly without sin. Itrust, Jane, you are in earnest when you say you will serve your heartto God: it is all I want. Once wrench your heart from man, and fix iton your Maker, the advancement of that Maker’s spiritual kingdom onearth will be your chief delight and endeavour; you will be ready to doat once whatever furthers that end. You will see what impetus would begiven to your efforts and mine by our physical and mental union inmarriage: the only union that gives a character of permanent conformityto the destinies and designs of human beings; and, passing over allminor caprices—all trivial difficulties and delicacies of feeling—allscruple about the degree, kind, strength or tenderness of mere personalinclination—you will hasten to enter into that union at once.”“Shall I?” I said briefly; and I looked at his features, beautiful intheir harmony, but strangely formidable in their still severity; at hisbrow, commanding but not open; at his eyes, bright and deep andsearching, but never soft; at his tall imposing figure; and fanciedmyself in idea _his wife_. Oh! it would never do! As his curate, hiscomrade, all would be right: I would cross oceans with him in thatcapacity; toil under Eastern suns, in Asian deserts with him in thatoffice; admire and emulate his courage and devotion and vigour;accommodate quietly to his masterhood; smile undisturbed at hisineradicable ambition; discriminate the Christian from the man:profoundly esteem the one, and freely forgive the other. I shouldsuffer often, no doubt, attached to him only in this capacity: my bodywould be under rather a stringent yoke, but my heart and mind would befree. I should still have my unblighted self to turn to: my naturalunenslaved feelings with which to communicate in moments of loneliness.There would be recesses in my mind which would be only mine, to whichhe never came, and sentiments growing there fresh and sheltered whichhis austerity could never blight, nor his measured warrior-marchtrample down: but as his wife—at his side always, and alwaysrestrained, and always checked—forced to keep the fire of my naturecontinually low, to compel it to burn inwardly and never utter a cry,though the imprisoned flame consumed vital after vital—_this_ would beunendurable.“St. John!” I exclaimed, when I had got so far in my meditation.“Well?” he answered icily.“I repeat I freely consent to go with you as your fellow-missionary,but not as your wife; I cannot marry you and become part of you.”“A part of me you must become,” he answered steadily; “otherwise thewhole bargain is void. How can I, a man not yet thirty, take out withme to India a girl of nineteen, unless she be married to me? How can webe for ever together—sometimes in solitudes, sometimes amidst savagetribes—and unwed?”“Very well,” I said shortly; “under the circumstances, quite as well asif I were either your real sister, or a man and a clergyman likeyourself.”“It is known that you are not my sister; I cannot introduce you assuch: to attempt it would be to fasten injurious suspicions on us both.And for the rest, though you have a man’s vigorous brain, you have awoman’s heart and—it would not do.”“It would do,” I affirmed with some disdain, “perfectly well. I have awoman’s heart, but not where you are concerned; for you I have only acomrade’s constancy; a fellow-soldier’s frankness, fidelity,fraternity, if you like; a neophyte’s respect and submission to hishierophant: nothing more—don’t fear.”“It is what I want,” he said, speaking to himself; “it is just what Iwant. And there are obstacles in the way: they must be hewn down. Jane,you would not repent marrying me—be certain of that; we _must_ bemarried. I repeat it: there is no other way; and undoubtedly enough oflove would follow upon marriage to render the union right even in youreyes.”“I scorn your idea of love,” I could not help saying, as I rose up andstood before him, leaning my back against the rock. “I scorn thecounterfeit sentiment you offer: yes, St. John, and I scorn you whenyou offer it.”He looked at me fixedly, compressing his well-cut lips while he did so.Whether he was incensed or surprised, or what, it was not easy to tell:he could command his countenance thoroughly.“I scarcely expected to hear that expression from you,” he said: “Ithink I have done and uttered nothing to deserve scorn.”I was touched by his gentle tone, and overawed by his high, calm mien.“Forgive me the words, St. John; but it is your own fault that I havebeen roused to speak so unguardedly. You have introduced a topic onwhich our natures are at variance—a topic we should never discuss: thevery name of love is an apple of discord between us. If the realitywere required, what should we do? How should we feel? My dear cousin,abandon your scheme of marriage—forget it.”“No,” said he; “it is a long-cherished scheme, and the only one whichcan secure my great end: but I shall urge you no further at present.To-morrow, I leave home for Cambridge: I have many friends there towhom I should wish to say farewell. I shall be absent a fortnight—takethat space of time to consider my offer: and do not forget that if youreject it, it is not me you deny, but God. Through my means, He opensto you a noble career; as my wife only can you enter upon it. Refuse tobe my wife, and you limit yourself for ever to a track of selfish easeand barren obscurity. Tremble lest in that case you should be numberedwith those who have denied the faith, and are worse than infidels!”He had done. Turning from me, he once more“Looked to river, looked to hill.”But this time his feelings were all pent in his heart: I was not worthyto hear them uttered. As I walked by his side homeward, I read well inhis iron silence all he felt towards me: the disappointment of anaustere and despotic nature, which has met resistance where it expectedsubmission—the disapprobation of a cool, inflexible judgment, which hasdetected in another feelings and views in which it has no power tosympathise: in short, as a man, he would have wished to coerce me intoobedience: it was only as a sincere Christian he bore so patiently withmy perversity, and allowed so long a space for reflection andrepentance.That night, after he had kissed his sisters, he thought proper toforget even to shake hands with me, but left the room in silence.I—who, though I had no love, had much friendship for him—was hurt bythe marked omission: so much hurt that tears started to my eyes.“I see you and St. John have been quarrelling, Jane,” said Diana,“during your walk on the moor. But go after him; he is now lingering inthe passage expecting you—he will make it up.”I have not much pride under such circumstances: I would always ratherbe happy than dignified; and I ran after him—he stood at the foot ofthe stairs.“Good-night, St. John,” said I.“Good-night, Jane,” he replied calmly.“Then shake hands,” I added.What a cold, loose touch, he impressed on my fingers! He was deeplydispleased by what had occurred that day; cordiality would not warm,nor tears move him. No happy reconciliation was to be had with him—nocheering smile or generous word: but still the Christian was patientand placid; and when I asked him if he forgave me, he answered that hewas not in the habit of cherishing the remembrance of vexation; that hehad nothing to forgive, not having been offended.And with that answer he left me. I would much rather he had knocked medown.CHAPTER XXXVHe did not leave for Cambridge the next day, as he had said he would.He deferred his departure a whole week, and during that time he made mefeel what severe punishment a good yet stern, a conscientious yetimplacable man can inflict on one who has offended him. Without oneovert act of hostility, one upbraiding word, he contrived to impress memomently with the conviction that I was put beyond the pale of hisfavour.Not that St. John harboured a spirit of unchristian vindictiveness—notthat he would have injured a hair of my head, if it had been fully inhis power to do so. Both by nature and principle, he was superior tothe mean gratification of vengeance: he had forgiven me for saying Iscorned him and his love, but he had not forgotten the words; and aslong as he and I lived he never would forget them. I saw by his look,when he turned to me, that they were always written on the air betweenme and him; whenever I spoke, they sounded in my voice to his ear, andtheir echo toned every answer he gave me.He did not abstain from conversing with me: he even called me as usualeach morning to join him at his desk; and I fear the corrupt man withinhim had a pleasure unimparted to, and unshared by, the pure Christian,in evincing with what skill he could, while acting and speakingapparently just as usual, extract from every deed and every phrase thespirit of interest and approval which had formerly communicated acertain austere charm to his language and manner. To me, he was inreality become no longer flesh, but marble; his eye was a cold, bright,blue gem; his tongue a speaking instrument—nothing more.All this was torture to me—refined, lingering torture. It kept up aslow fire of indignation and a trembling trouble of grief, whichharassed and crushed me altogether. I felt how—if I were his wife, thisgood man, pure as the deep sunless source, could soon kill me, withoutdrawing from my veins a single drop of blood, or receiving on his owncrystal conscience the faintest stain of crime. Especially I felt thiswhen I made any attempt to propitiate him. No ruth met my ruth. _He_experienced no suffering from estrangement—no yearning afterreconciliation; and though, more than once, my fast falling tearsblistered the page over which we both bent, they produced no moreeffect on him than if his heart had been really a matter of stone ormetal. To his sisters, meantime, he was somewhat kinder than usual: asif afraid that mere coldness would not sufficiently convince me howcompletely I was banished and banned, he added the force of contrast;and this I am sure he did not by malice, but on principle.The night before he left home, happening to see him walking in thegarden about sunset, and remembering, as I looked at him, that thisman, alienated as he now was, had once saved my life, and that we werenear relations, I was moved to make a last attempt to regain hisfriendship. I went out and approached him as he stood leaning over thelittle gate; I spoke to the point at once.“St. John, I am unhappy because you are still angry with me. Let us befriends.”“I hope we are friends,” was the unmoved reply; while he still watchedthe rising of the moon, which he had been contemplating as Iapproached.“No, St. John, we are not friends as we were. You know that.”“Are we not? That is wrong. For my part, I wish you no ill and allgood.”“I believe you, St. John; for I am sure you are incapable of wishingany one ill; but, as I am your kinswoman, I should desire somewhat moreof affection than that sort of general philanthropy you extend to merestrangers.”“Of course,” he said. “Your wish is reasonable, and I am far fromregarding you as a stranger.”This, spoken in a cool, tranquil tone, was mortifying and bafflingenough. Had I attended to the suggestions of pride and ire, I shouldimmediately have left him; but something worked within me more stronglythan those feelings could. I deeply venerated my cousin’s talent andprinciple. His friendship was of value to me: to lose it tried meseverely. I would not so soon relinquish the attempt to reconquer it.“Must we part in this way, St. John? And when you go to India, will youleave me so, without a kinder word than you have yet spoken?”He now turned quite from the moon and faced me.“When I go to India, Jane, will I leave you! What! do you not go toIndia?”“You said I could not unless I married you.”“And you will not marry me! You adhere to that resolution?”Reader, do you know, as I do, what terror those cold people can putinto the ice of their questions? How much of the fall of the avalancheis in their anger? of the breaking up of the frozen sea in theirdispleasure?“No. St. John, I will not marry you. I adhere to my resolution.”The avalanche had shaken and slid a little forward, but it did not yetcrash down.“Once more, why this refusal?” he asked.“Formerly,” I answered, “because you did not love me; now, I reply,because you almost hate me. If I were to marry you, you would kill me.You are killing me now.”His lips and cheeks turned white—quite white.“_I should kill you_—_I am killing you_? Your words are such as oughtnot to be used: violent, unfeminine, and untrue. They betray anunfortunate state of mind: they merit severe reproof: they would seeminexcusable, but that it is the duty of man to forgive his fellow evenuntil seventy-and-seven times.”I had finished the business now. While earnestly wishing to erase fromhis mind the trace of my former offence, I had stamped on thattenacious surface another and far deeper impression: I had burnt it in.“Now you will indeed hate me,” I said. “It is useless to attempt toconciliate you: I see I have made an eternal enemy of you.”A fresh wrong did these words inflict: the worse, because they touchedon the truth. That bloodless lip quivered to a temporary spasm. I knewthe steely ire I had whetted. I was heart-wrung.“You utterly misinterpret my words,” I said, at once seizing his hand:“I have no intention to grieve or pain you—indeed, I have not.”Most bitterly he smiled—most decidedly he withdrew his hand from mine.“And now you recall your promise, and will not go to India at all, Ipresume?” said he, after a considerable pause.“Yes, I will, as your assistant,” I answered.A very long silence succeeded. What struggle there was in him betweenNature and Grace in this interval, I cannot tell: only singular gleamsscintillated in his eyes, and strange shadows passed over his face. Hespoke at last.“I before proved to you the absurdity of a single woman of your ageproposing to accompany abroad a single man of mine. I proved it to youin such terms as, I should have thought, would have prevented your everagain alluding to the plan. That you have done so, I regret—for yoursake.”I interrupted him. Anything like a tangible reproach gave me courage atonce. “Keep to common sense, St. John: you are verging on nonsense. Youpretend to be shocked by what I have said. You are not really shocked:for, with your superior mind, you cannot be either so dull or soconceited as to misunderstand my meaning. I say again, I will be yourcurate, if you like, but never your wife.”Again he turned lividly pale; but, as before, controlled his passionperfectly. He answered emphatically but calmly—“A female curate, who is not my wife, would never suit me. With me,then, it seems, you cannot go: but if you are sincere in your offer, Iwill, while in town, speak to a married missionary, whose wife needs acoadjutor. Your own fortune will make you independent of the Society’said; and thus you may still be spared the dishonour of breaking yourpromise and deserting the band you engaged to join.”Now I never had, as the reader knows, either given any formal promiseor entered into any engagement; and this language was all much too hardand much too despotic for the occasion. I replied—“There is no dishonour, no breach of promise, no desertion in the case.I am not under the slightest obligation to go to India, especially withstrangers. With you I would have ventured much, because I admire,confide in, and, as a sister, I love you; but I am convinced that, gowhen and with whom I would, I should not live long in that climate.”“Ah! you are afraid of yourself,” he said, curling his lip.“I am. God did not give me my life to throw away; and to do as you wishme would, I begin to think, be almost equivalent to committing suicide.Moreover, before I definitively resolve on quitting England, I willknow for certain whether I cannot be of greater use by remaining in itthan by leaving it.”“What do you mean?”“It would be fruitless to attempt to explain; but there is a point onwhich I have long endured painful doubt, and I can go nowhere till bysome means that doubt is removed.”“I know where your heart turns and to what it clings. The interest youcherish is lawless and unconsecrated. Long since you ought to havecrushed it: now you should blush to allude to it. You think of Mr.Rochester?”It was true. I confessed it by silence.“Are you going to seek Mr. Rochester?”“I must find out what is become of him.”“It remains for me, then,” he said, “to remember you in my prayers, andto entreat God for you, in all earnestness, that you may not indeedbecome a castaway. I had thought I recognised in you one of the chosen.But God sees not as man sees: _His_ will be done—”He opened the gate, passed through it, and strayed away down the glen.He was soon out of sight.On re-entering the parlour, I found Diana standing at the window,looking very thoughtful. Diana was a great deal taller than I: she puther hand on my shoulder, and, stooping, examined my face.“Jane,” she said, “you are always agitated and pale now. I am surethere is something the matter. Tell me what business St. John and youhave on hands. I have watched you this half hour from the window; youmust forgive my being such a spy, but for a long time I have fancied Ihardly know what. St. John is a strange being—”She paused—I did not speak: soon she resumed—“That brother of mine cherishes peculiar views of some sort respectingyou, I am sure: he has long distinguished you by a notice and interesthe never showed to any one else—to what end? I wish he loved you—doeshe, Jane?”I put her cool hand to my hot forehead; “No, Die, not one whit.”“Then why does he follow you so with his eyes, and get you sofrequently alone with him, and keep you so continually at his side?Mary and I had both concluded he wished you to marry him.”“He does—he has asked me to be his wife.”Diana clapped her hands. “That is just what we hoped and thought! Andyou will marry him, Jane, won’t you? And then he will stay in England.”“Far from that, Diana; his sole idea in proposing to me is to procure afitting fellow-labourer in his Indian toils.”“What! He wishes you to go to India?”“Yes.”“Madness!” she exclaimed. “You would not live three months there, I amcertain. You never shall go: you have not consented, have you, Jane?”“I have refused to marry him—”“And have consequently displeased him?” she suggested.“Deeply: he will never forgive me, I fear: yet I offered to accompanyhim as his sister.”“It was frantic folly to do so, Jane. Think of the task youundertook—one of incessant fatigue, where fatigue kills even thestrong, and you are weak. St. John—you know him—would urge you toimpossibilities: with him there would be no permission to rest duringthe hot hours; and unfortunately, I have noticed, whatever he exacts,you force yourself to perform. I am astonished you found courage torefuse his hand. You do not love him then, Jane?”“Not as a husband.”“Yet he is a handsome fellow.”“And I am so plain, you see, Die. We should never suit.”“Plain! You? Not at all. You are much too pretty, as well as too good,to be grilled alive in Calcutta.” And again she earnestly conjured meto give up all thoughts of going out with her brother.“I must indeed,” I said; “for when just now I repeated the offer ofserving him for a deacon, he expressed himself shocked at my want ofdecency. He seemed to think I had committed an impropriety in proposingto accompany him unmarried: as if I had not from the first hoped tofind in him a brother, and habitually regarded him as such.”“What makes you say he does not love you, Jane?”“You should hear himself on the subject. He has again and againexplained that it is not himself, but his office he wishes to mate. Hehas told me I am formed for labour—not for love: which is true, nodoubt. But, in my opinion, if I am not formed for love, it follows thatI am not formed for marriage. Would it not be strange, Die, to bechained for life to a man who regarded one but as a useful tool?”“Insupportable—unnatural—out of the question!”“And then,” I continued, “though I have only sisterly affection for himnow, yet, if forced to be his wife, I can imagine the possibility ofconceiving an inevitable, strange, torturing kind of love for him,because he is so talented; and there is often a certain heroic grandeurin his look, manner, and conversation. In that case, my lot wouldbecome unspeakably wretched. He would not want me to love him; and if Ishowed the feeling, he would make me sensible that it was asuperfluity, unrequired by him, unbecoming in me. I know he would.”“And yet St. John is a good man,” said Diana.“He is a good and a great man; but he forgets, pitilessly, the feelingsand claims of little people, in pursuing his own large views. It isbetter, therefore, for the insignificant to keep out of his way, lest,in his progress, he should trample them down. Here he comes! I willleave you, Diana.” And I hastened upstairs as I saw him entering thegarden.But I was forced to meet him again at supper. During that meal heappeared just as composed as usual. I had thought he would hardly speakto me, and I was certain he had given up the pursuit of his matrimonialscheme: the sequel showed I was mistaken on both points. He addressedme precisely in his ordinary manner, or what had, of late, been hisordinary manner—one scrupulously polite. No doubt he had invoked thehelp of the Holy Spirit to subdue the anger I had roused in him, andnow believed he had forgiven me once more.For the evening reading before prayers, he selected the twenty-firstchapter of Revelation. It was at all times pleasant to listen whilefrom his lips fell the words of the Bible: never did his fine voicesound at once so sweet and full—never did his manner become soimpressive in its noble simplicity, as when he delivered the oracles ofGod: and to-night that voice took a more solemn tone—that manner a morethrilling meaning—as he sat in the midst of his household circle (theMay moon shining in through the uncurtained window, and renderingalmost unnecessary the light of the candle on the table): as he satthere, bending over the great old Bible, and described from its pagethe vision of the new heaven and the new earth—told how God would cometo dwell with men, how He would wipe away all tears from their eyes,and promised that there should be no more death, neither sorrow norcrying, nor any more pain, because the former things were passed away.The succeeding words thrilled me strangely as he spoke them: especiallyas I felt, by the slight, indescribable alteration in sound, that inuttering them, his eye had turned on me.“He that overcometh shall inherit all things; and I will be his God,and he shall be my son. But,” was slowly, distinctly read, “thefearful, the unbelieving, &c., shall have their part in the lake whichburneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.”Henceforward, I knew what fate St. John feared for me.A calm, subdued triumph, blent with a longing earnestness, marked hisenunciation of the last glorious verses of that chapter. The readerbelieved his name was already written in the Lamb’s book of life, andhe yearned after the hour which should admit him to the city to whichthe kings of the earth bring their glory and honour; which has no needof sun or moon to shine in it, because the glory of God lightens it,and the Lamb is the light thereof.In the prayer following the chapter, all his energy gathered—all hisstern zeal woke: he was in deep earnest, wrestling with God, andresolved on a conquest. He supplicated strength for the weak-hearted;guidance for wanderers from the fold: a return, even at the eleventhhour, for those whom the temptations of the world and the flesh wereluring from the narrow path. He asked, he urged, he claimed the boon ofa brand snatched from the burning. Earnestness is ever deeply solemn:first, as I listened to that prayer, I wondered at his; then, when itcontinued and rose, I was touched by it, and at last awed. He felt thegreatness and goodness of his purpose so sincerely: others who heardhim plead for it, could not but feel it too.The prayer over, we took leave of him: he was to go at a very earlyhour in the morning. Diana and Mary having kissed him, left the room—incompliance, I think, with a whispered hint from him: I tendered myhand, and wished him a pleasant journey.“Thank you, Jane. As I said, I shall return from Cambridge in afortnight: that space, then, is yet left you for reflection. If Ilistened to human pride, I should say no more to you of marriage withme; but I listen to my duty, and keep steadily in view my first aim—todo all things to the glory of God. My Master was long-suffering: sowill I be. I cannot give you up to perdition as a vessel of wrath:repent—resolve, while there is yet time. Remember, we are bid to workwhile it is day—warned that ‘the night cometh when no man shall work.’Remember the fate of Dives, who had his good things in this life. Godgive you strength to choose that better part which shall not be takenfrom you!”He laid his hand on my head as he uttered the last words. He had spokenearnestly, mildly: his look was not, indeed, that of a lover beholdinghis mistress, but it was that of a pastor recalling his wanderingsheep—or better, of a guardian angel watching the soul for which he isresponsible. All men of talent, whether they be men of feeling or not;whether they be zealots, or aspirants, or despots—provided only they besincere—have their sublime moments, when they subdue and rule. I feltveneration for St. John—veneration so strong that its impetus thrust meat once to the point I had so long shunned. I was tempted to ceasestruggling with him—to rush down the torrent of his will into the gulfof his existence, and there lose my own. I was almost as hard beset byhim now as I had been once before, in a different way, by another. Iwas a fool both times. To have yielded then would have been an error ofprinciple; to have yielded now would have been an error of judgment. SoI think at this hour, when I look back to the crisis through the quietmedium of time: I was unconscious of folly at the instant.I stood motionless under my hierophant’s touch. My refusals wereforgotten—my fears overcome—my wrestlings paralysed. TheImpossible—_i.e._, my marriage with St. John—was fast becoming thePossible. All was changing utterly with a sudden sweep. Religioncalled—Angels beckoned—God commanded—life rolled together like ascroll—death’s gates opening, showed eternity beyond: it seemed, thatfor safety and bliss there, all here might be sacrificed in a second.The dim room was full of visions.“Could you decide now?” asked the missionary. The inquiry was put ingentle tones: he drew me to him as gently. Oh, that gentleness! how farmore potent is it than force! I could resist St. John’s wrath: I grewpliant as a reed under his kindness. Yet I knew all the time, if Iyielded now, I should not the less be made to repent, some day, of myformer rebellion. His nature was not changed by one hour of solemnprayer: it was only elevated.“I could decide if I were but certain,” I answered: “were I butconvinced that it is God’s will I should marry you, I could vow tomarry you here and now—come afterwards what would!”“My prayers are heard!” ejaculated St. John. He pressed his hand firmeron my head, as if he claimed me: he surrounded me with his arm,_almost_ as if he loved me (I say _almost_—I knew the difference—for Ihad felt what it was to be loved; but, like him, I had now put love outof the question, and thought only of duty). I contended with my inwarddimness of vision, before which clouds yet rolled. I sincerely, deeply,fervently longed to do what was right; and only that. “Show me, show methe path!” I entreated of Heaven. I was excited more than I had everbeen; and whether what followed was the effect of excitement the readershall judge.All the house was still; for I believe all, except St. John and myself,were now retired to rest. The one candle was dying out: the room wasfull of moonlight. My heart beat fast and thick: I heard its throb.Suddenly it stood still to an inexpressible feeling that thrilled itthrough, and passed at once to my head and extremities. The feeling wasnot like an electric shock, but it was quite as sharp, as strange, asstartling: it acted on my senses as if their utmost activity hithertohad been but torpor, from which they were now summoned and forced towake. They rose expectant: eye and ear waited while the flesh quiveredon my bones.“What have you heard? What do you see?” asked St. John. I saw nothing,but I heard a voice somewhere cry—“Jane! Jane! Jane!”—nothing more.“O God! what is it?” I gasped.I might have said, “Where is it?” for it did not seem in the room—norin the house—nor in the garden; it did not come out of the air—nor fromunder the earth—nor from overhead. I had heard it—where, or whence, forever impossible to know! And it was the voice of a human being—a known,loved, well-remembered voice—that of Edward Fairfax Rochester; and itspoke in pain and woe, wildly, eerily, urgently.“I am coming!” I cried. “Wait for me! Oh, I will come!” I flew to thedoor and looked into the passage: it was dark. I ran out into thegarden: it was void.“Where are you?” I exclaimed.The hills beyond Marsh Glen sent the answer faintly back—“Where areyou?” I listened. The wind sighed low in the firs: all was moorlandloneliness and midnight hush.“Down superstition!” I commented, as that spectre rose up black by theblack yew at the gate. “This is not thy deception, nor thy witchcraft:it is the work of nature. She was roused, and did—no miracle—but herbest.”I broke from St. John, who had followed, and would have detained me. Itwas _my_ time to assume ascendency. _My_ powers were in play and inforce. I told him to forbear question or remark; I desired him to leaveme: I must and would be alone. He obeyed at once. Where there is energyto command well enough, obedience never fails. I mounted to my chamber;locked myself in; fell on my knees; and prayed in my way—a differentway to St. John’s, but effective in its own fashion. I seemed topenetrate very near a Mighty Spirit; and my soul rushed out ingratitude at His feet. I rose from the thanksgiving—took a resolve—andlay down, unscared, enlightened—eager but for the daylight.CHAPTER XXXVIThe daylight came. I rose at dawn. I busied myself for an hour or twowith arranging my things in my chamber, drawers, and wardrobe, in theorder wherein I should wish to leave them during a brief absence.Meantime, I heard St. John quit his room. He stopped at my door: Ifeared he would knock—no, but a slip of paper was passed under thedoor. I took it up. It bore these words—“You left me too suddenly last night. Had you stayed but a littlelonger, you would have laid your hand on the Christian’s cross and theangel’s crown. I shall expect your clear decision when I return thisday fortnight. Meantime, watch and pray that you enter not intotemptation: the spirit, I trust, is willing, but the flesh, I see, isweak. I shall pray for you hourly.—Yours, ST. JOHN.”“My spirit,” I answered mentally, “is willing to do what is right; andmy flesh, I hope, is strong enough to accomplish the will of Heaven,when once that will is distinctly known to me. At any rate, it shall bestrong enough to search—inquire—to grope an outlet from this cloud ofdoubt, and find the open day of certainty.”It was the first of June; yet the morning was overcast and chilly: rainbeat fast on my casement. I heard the front-door open, and St. Johnpass out. Looking through the window, I saw him traverse the garden. Hetook the way over the misty moors in the direction of Whitcross—therehe would meet the coach.“In a few more hours I shall succeed you in that track, cousin,”thought I: “I too have a coach to meet at Whitcross. I too have some tosee and ask after in England, before I depart for ever.”It wanted yet two hours of breakfast-time. I filled the interval inwalking softly about my room, and pondering the visitation which hadgiven my plans their present bent. I recalled that inward sensation Ihad experienced: for I could recall it, with all its unspeakablestrangeness. I recalled the voice I had heard; again I questionedwhence it came, as vainly as before: it seemed in _me_—not in theexternal world. I asked was it a mere nervous impression—a delusion? Icould not conceive or believe: it was more like an inspiration. Thewondrous shock of feeling had come like the earthquake which shook thefoundations of Paul and Silas’s prison; it had opened the doors of thesoul’s cell and loosed its bands—it had wakened it out of its sleep,whence it sprang trembling, listening, aghast; then vibrated thrice acry on my startled ear, and in my quaking heart and through my spirit,which neither feared nor shook, but exulted as if in joy over thesuccess of one effort it had been privileged to make, independent ofthe cumbrous body.“Ere many days,” I said, as I terminated my musings, “I will knowsomething of him whose voice seemed last night to summon me. Lettershave proved of no avail—personal inquiry shall replace them.”At breakfast I announced to Diana and Mary that I was going a journey,and should be absent at least four days.“Alone, Jane?” they asked.“Yes; it was to see or hear news of a friend about whom I had for sometime been uneasy.”They might have said, as I have no doubt they thought, that they hadbelieved me to be without any friends save them: for, indeed, I hadoften said so; but, with their true natural delicacy, they abstainedfrom comment, except that Diana asked me if I was sure I was wellenough to travel. I looked very pale, she observed. I replied, thatnothing ailed me save anxiety of mind, which I hoped soon to alleviate.It was easy to make my further arrangements; for I was troubled with noinquiries—no surmises. Having once explained to them that I could notnow be explicit about my plans, they kindly and wisely acquiesced inthe silence with which I pursued them, according to me the privilege offree action I should under similar circumstances have accorded them.I left Moor House at three o’clock P.M., and soon after four I stood atthe foot of the sign-post of Whitcross, waiting the arrival of thecoach which was to take me to distant Thornfield. Amidst the silence ofthose solitary roads and desert hills, I heard it approach from a greatdistance. It was the same vehicle whence, a year ago, I had alightedone summer evening on this very spot—how desolate, and hopeless, andobjectless! It stopped as I beckoned. I entered—not now obliged to partwith my whole fortune as the price of its accommodation. Once more onthe road to Thornfield, I felt like the messenger-pigeon flying home.It was a journey of six-and-thirty hours. I had set out from Whitcrosson a Tuesday afternoon, and early on the succeeding Thursday morningthe coach stopped to water the horses at a wayside inn, situated in themidst of scenery whose green hedges and large fields and low pastoralhills (how mild of feature and verdant of hue compared with the sternNorth-Midland moors of Morton!) met my eye like the lineaments of aonce familiar face. Yes, I knew the character of this landscape: I wassure we were near my bourne.“How far is Thornfield Hall from here?” I asked of the ostler.“Just two miles, ma’am, across the fields.”“My journey is closed,” I thought to myself. I got out of the coach,gave a box I had into the ostler’s charge, to be kept till I called forit; paid my fare; satisfied the coachman, and was going: thebrightening day gleamed on the sign of the inn, and I read in giltletters, “The Rochester Arms.” My heart leapt up: I was already on mymaster’s very lands. It fell again: the thought struck it:—“Your master himself may be beyond the British Channel, for aught youknow: and then, if he is at Thornfield Hall, towards which you hasten,who besides him is there? His lunatic wife: and you have nothing to dowith him: you dare not speak to him or seek his presence. You have lostyour labour—you had better go no farther,” urged the monitor. “Askinformation of the people at the inn; they can give you all you seek:they can solve your doubts at once. Go up to that man, and inquire ifMr. Rochester be at home.”The suggestion was sensible, and yet I could not force myself to act onit. I so dreaded a reply that would crush me with despair. To prolongdoubt was to prolong hope. I might yet once more see the Hall under theray of her star. There was the stile before me—the very fields throughwhich I had hurried, blind, deaf, distracted with a revengeful furytracking and scourging me, on the morning I fled from Thornfield: ere Iwell knew what course I had resolved to take, I was in the midst ofthem. How fast I walked! How I ran sometimes! How I looked forward tocatch the first view of the well-known woods! With what feelings Iwelcomed single trees I knew, and familiar glimpses of meadow and hillbetween them!At last the woods rose; the rookery clustered dark; a loud cawing brokethe morning stillness. Strange delight inspired me: on I hastened.Another field crossed—a lane threaded—and there were the courtyardwalls—the back offices: the house itself, the rookery still hid. “Myfirst view of it shall be in front,” I determined, “where its boldbattlements will strike the eye nobly at once, and where I can singleout my master’s very window: perhaps he will be standing at it—he risesearly: perhaps he is now walking in the orchard, or on the pavement infront. Could I but see him!—but a moment! Surely, in that case, Ishould not be so mad as to run to him? I cannot tell—I am not certain.And if I did—what then? God bless him! What then? Who would be hurt bymy once more tasting the life his glance can give me? I rave: perhapsat this moment he is watching the sun rise over the Pyrenees, or on thetideless sea of the south.”I had coasted along the lower wall of the orchard—turned its angle:there was a gate just there, opening into the meadow, between two stonepillars crowned by stone balls. From behind one pillar I could peepround quietly at the full front of the mansion. I advanced my head withprecaution, desirous to ascertain if any bedroom window-blinds were yetdrawn up: battlements, windows, long front—all from this shelteredstation were at my command.The crows sailing overhead perhaps watched me while I took this survey.I wonder what they thought. They must have considered I was verycareful and timid at first, and that gradually I grew very bold andreckless. A peep, and then a long stare; and then a departure from myniche and a straying out into the meadow; and a sudden stop full infront of the great mansion, and a protracted, hardy gaze towards it.“What affectation of diffidence was this at first?” they might havedemanded; “what stupid regardlessness now?”Hear an illustration, reader.A lover finds his mistress asleep on a mossy bank; he wishes to catch aglimpse of her fair face without waking her. He steals softly over thegrass, careful to make no sound; he pauses—fancying she has stirred: hewithdraws: not for worlds would he be seen. All is still: he againadvances: he bends above her; a light veil rests on her features: helifts it, bends lower; now his eyes anticipate the vision ofbeauty—warm, and blooming, and lovely, in rest. How hurried was theirfirst glance! But how they fix! How he starts! How he suddenly andvehemently clasps in both arms the form he dared not, a moment since,touch with his finger! How he calls aloud a name, and drops his burden,and gazes on it wildly! He thus grasps and cries, and gazes, because heno longer fears to waken by any sound he can utter—by any movement hecan make. He thought his love slept sweetly: he finds she is stonedead.I looked with timorous joy towards a stately house: I saw a blackenedruin.No need to cower behind a gate-post, indeed!—to peep up at chamberlattices, fearing life was astir behind them! No need to listen fordoors opening—to fancy steps on the pavement or the gravel-walk! Thelawn, the grounds were trodden and waste: the portal yawned void. Thefront was, as I had once seen it in a dream, but a shell-like wall,very high and very fragile-looking, perforated with paneless windows:no roof, no battlements, no chimneys—all had crashed in.And there was the silence of death about it: the solitude of a lonesomewild. No wonder that letters addressed to people here had neverreceived an answer: as well despatch epistles to a vault in a churchaisle. The grim blackness of the stones told by what fate the Hall hadfallen—by conflagration: but how kindled? What story belonged to thisdisaster? What loss, besides mortar and marble and wood-work hadfollowed upon it? Had life been wrecked as well as property? If so,whose? Dreadful question: there was no one here to answer it—not evendumb sign, mute token.In wandering round the shattered walls and through the devastatedinterior, I gathered evidence that the calamity was not of lateoccurrence. Winter snows, I thought, had drifted through that voidarch, winter rains beaten in at those hollow casements; for, amidst thedrenched piles of rubbish, spring had cherished vegetation: grass andweed grew here and there between the stones and fallen rafters. And oh!where meantime was the hapless owner of this wreck? In what land? Underwhat auspices? My eye involuntarily wandered to the grey church towernear the gates, and I asked, “Is he with Damer de Rochester, sharingthe shelter of his narrow marble house?”Some answer must be had to these questions. I could find it nowhere butat the inn, and thither, ere long, I returned. The host himself broughtmy breakfast into the parlour. I requested him to shut the door and sitdown: I had some questions to ask him. But when he complied, I scarcelyknew how to begin; such horror had I of the possible answers. And yetthe spectacle of desolation I had just left prepared me in a measurefor a tale of misery. The host was a respectable-looking, middle-agedman.“You know Thornfield Hall, of course?” I managed to say at last.“Yes, ma’am; I lived there once.”“Did you?” Not in my time, I thought: you are a stranger to me.“I was the late Mr. Rochester’s butler,” he added.The late! I seem to have received, with full force, the blow I had beentrying to evade.“The late!” I gasped. “Is he dead?”“I mean the present gentleman, Mr. Edward’s father,” he explained. Ibreathed again: my blood resumed its flow. Fully assured by these wordsthat Mr. Edward—_my_ Mr. Rochester (God bless him, wherever hewas!)—was at least alive: was, in short, “the present gentleman.”Gladdening words! It seemed I could hear all that was to come—whateverthe disclosures might be—with comparative tranquillity. Since he wasnot in the grave, I could bear, I thought, to learn that he was at theAntipodes.“Is Mr. Rochester living at Thornfield Hall now?” I asked, knowing, ofcourse, what the answer would be, but yet desirous of deferring thedirect question as to where he really was.“No, ma’am—oh, no! No one is living there. I suppose you are a strangerin these parts, or you would have heard what happened lastautumn,—Thornfield Hall is quite a ruin: it was burnt down just aboutharvest-time. A dreadful calamity! such an immense quantity of valuableproperty destroyed: hardly any of the furniture could be saved. Thefire broke out at dead of night, and before the engines arrived fromMillcote, the building was one mass of flame. It was a terriblespectacle: I witnessed it myself.”“At dead of night!” I muttered. Yes, that was ever the hour of fatalityat Thornfield. “Was it known how it originated?” I demanded.“They guessed, ma’am: they guessed. Indeed, I should say it wasascertained beyond a doubt. You are not perhaps aware,” he continued,edging his chair a little nearer the table, and speaking low, “thatthere was a lady—a—a lunatic, kept in the house?”“I have heard something of it.”“She was kept in very close confinement, ma’am; people even for someyears was not absolutely certain of her existence. No one saw her: theyonly knew by rumour that such a person was at the Hall; and who or whatshe was it was difficult to conjecture. They said Mr. Edward hadbrought her from abroad, and some believed she had been his mistress.But a queer thing happened a year since—a very queer thing.”I feared now to hear my own story. I endeavoured to recall him to themain fact.“And this lady?”“This lady, ma’am,” he answered, “turned out to be Mr. Rochester’swife! The discovery was brought about in the strangest way. There was ayoung lady, a governess at the Hall, that Mr. Rochester fell in—”“But the fire,” I suggested.“I’m coming to that, ma’am—that Mr. Edward fell in love with. Theservants say they never saw anybody so much in love as he was: he wasafter her continually. They used to watch him—servants will, you know,ma’am—and he set store on her past everything: for all, nobody but himthought her so very handsome. She was a little small thing, they say,almost like a child. I never saw her myself; but I’ve heard Leah, thehouse-maid, tell of her. Leah liked her well enough. Mr. Rochester wasabout forty, and this governess not twenty; and you see, when gentlemenof his age fall in love with girls, they are often like as if they werebewitched. Well, he would marry her.”“You shall tell me this part of the story another time,” I said; “butnow I have a particular reason for wishing to hear all about the fire.Was it suspected that this lunatic, Mrs. Rochester, had any hand init?”“You’ve hit it, ma’am: it’s quite certain that it was her, and nobodybut her, that set it going. She had a woman to take care of her calledMrs. Poole—an able woman in her line, and very trustworthy, but for onefault—a fault common to a deal of them nurses and matrons—_she kept aprivate bottle of gin by her_, and now and then took a drop over-much.It is excusable, for she had a hard life of it: but still it wasdangerous; for when Mrs. Poole was fast asleep after the gin and water,the mad lady, who was as cunning as a witch, would take the keys out ofher pocket, let herself out of her chamber, and go roaming about thehouse, doing any wild mischief that came into her head. They say shehad nearly burnt her husband in his bed once: but I don’t know aboutthat. However, on this night, she set fire first to the hangings of theroom next her own, and then she got down to a lower storey, and madeher way to the chamber that had been the governess’s—(she was like asif she knew somehow how matters had gone on, and had a spite ather)—and she kindled the bed there; but there was nobody sleeping init, fortunately. The governess had run away two months before; and forall Mr. Rochester sought her as if she had been the most precious thinghe had in the world, he never could hear a word of her; and he grewsavage—quite savage on his disappointment: he never was a wild man, buthe got dangerous after he lost her. He would be alone, too. He sentMrs. Fairfax, the housekeeper, away to her friends at a distance; buthe did it handsomely, for he settled an annuity on her for life: andshe deserved it—she was a very good woman. Miss Adèle, a ward he had,was put to school. He broke off acquaintance with all the gentry, andshut himself up like a hermit at the Hall.”“What! did he not leave England?”“Leave England? Bless you, no! He would not cross the door-stones ofthe house, except at night, when he walked just like a ghost about thegrounds and in the orchard as if he had lost his senses—which it is myopinion he had; for a more spirited, bolder, keener gentleman than hewas before that midge of a governess crossed him, you never saw, ma’am.He was not a man given to wine, or cards, or racing, as some are, andhe was not so very handsome; but he had a courage and a will of hisown, if ever man had. I knew him from a boy, you see: and for my part,I have often wished that Miss Eyre had been sunk in the sea before shecame to Thornfield Hall.”“Then Mr. Rochester was at home when the fire broke out?”“Yes, indeed was he; and he went up to the attics when all was burningabove and below, and got the servants out of their beds and helped themdown himself, and went back to get his mad wife out of her cell. Andthen they called out to him that she was on the roof, where she wasstanding, waving her arms, above the battlements, and shouting out tillthey could hear her a mile off: I saw her and heard her with my owneyes. She was a big woman, and had long black hair: we could see itstreaming against the flames as she stood. I witnessed, and severalmore witnessed, Mr. Rochester ascend through the sky-light on to theroof; we heard him call ‘Bertha!’ We saw him approach her; and then,ma’am, she yelled and gave a spring, and the next minute she laysmashed on the pavement.”The next minute she lay smashed on the pavement“Dead?”“Dead! Ay, dead as the stones on which her brains and blood werescattered.”“Good God!”“You may well say so, ma’am: it was frightful!”He shuddered.“And afterwards?” I urged.“Well, ma’am, afterwards the house was burnt to the ground: there areonly some bits of walls standing now.”“Were any other lives lost?”“No—perhaps it would have been better if there had.”“What do you mean?”“Poor Mr. Edward!” he ejaculated, “I little thought ever to have seenit! Some say it was a just judgment on him for keeping his firstmarriage secret, and wanting to take another wife while he had oneliving: but I pity him, for my part.”“You said he was alive?” I exclaimed.“Yes, yes: he is alive; but many think he had better be dead.”“Why? How?” My blood was again running cold. “Where is he?” I demanded.“Is he in England?”“Ay—ay—he’s in England; he can’t get out of England, I fancy—he’s afixture now.”What agony was this! And the man seemed resolved to protract it.“He is stone-blind,” he said at last. “Yes, he is stone-blind, is Mr.Edward.”I had dreaded worse. I had dreaded he was mad. I summoned strength toask what had caused this calamity.“It was all his own courage, and a body may say, his kindness, in away, ma’am: he wouldn’t leave the house till every one else was outbefore him. As he came down the great staircase at last, after Mrs.Rochester had flung herself from the battlements, there was a greatcrash—all fell. He was taken out from under the ruins, alive, but sadlyhurt: a beam had fallen in such a way as to protect him partly; but oneeye was knocked out, and one hand so crushed that Mr. Carter, thesurgeon, had to amputate it directly. The other eye inflamed: he lostthe sight of that also. He is now helpless, indeed—blind and acripple.”“Where is he? Where does he now live?”“At Ferndean, a manor-house on a farm he has, about thirty miles off:quite a desolate spot.”“Who is with him?”“Old John and his wife: he would have none else. He is quite brokendown, they say.”“Have you any sort of conveyance?”“We have a chaise, ma’am, a very handsome chaise.”“Let it be got ready instantly; and if your post-boy can drive me toFerndean before dark this day, I’ll pay both you and him twice the hireyou usually demand.”CHAPTER XXXVIIThe manor-house of Ferndean was a building of considerable antiquity,moderate size, and no architectural pretensions, deep buried in a wood.I had heard of it before. Mr. Rochester often spoke of it, andsometimes went there. His father had purchased the estate for the sakeof the game covers. He would have let the house, but could find notenant, in consequence of its ineligible and insalubrious site.Ferndean then remained uninhabited and unfurnished, with the exceptionof some two or three rooms fitted up for the accommodation of thesquire when he went there in the season to shoot.To this house I came just ere dark on an evening marked by thecharacteristics of sad sky, cold gale, and continued small penetratingrain. The last mile I performed on foot, having dismissed the chaiseand driver with the double remuneration I had promised. Even whenwithin a very short distance of the manor-house, you could see nothingof it, so thick and dark grew the timber of the gloomy wood about it.Iron gates between granite pillars showed me where to enter, andpassing through them, I found myself at once in the twilight ofclose-ranked trees. There was a grass-grown track descending the forestaisle between hoar and knotty shafts and under branched arches. Ifollowed it, expecting soon to reach the dwelling; but it stretched onand on, it wound far and farther: no sign of habitation or grounds wasvisible.I thought I had taken a wrong direction and lost my way. The darknessof natural as well as of sylvan dusk gathered over me. I looked roundin search of another road. There was none: all was interwoven stem,columnar trunk, dense summer foliage—no opening anywhere.I proceeded: at last my way opened, the trees thinned a little;presently I beheld a railing, then the house—scarce, by this dim light,distinguishable from the trees; so dank and green were its decayingwalls. Entering a portal, fastened only by a latch, I stood amidst aspace of enclosed ground, from which the wood swept away in asemicircle. There were no flowers, no garden-beds; only a broadgravel-walk girdling a grass-plat, and this set in the heavy frame ofthe forest. The house presented two pointed gables in its front; thewindows were latticed and narrow: the front door was narrow too, onestep led up to it. The whole looked, as the host of the Rochester Armshad said, “quite a desolate spot.” It was as still as a church on aweek-day: the pattering rain on the forest leaves was the only soundaudible in its vicinage.“Can there be life here?” I asked.Yes, life of some kind there was; for I heard a movement—that narrowfront-door was unclosing, and some shape was about to issue from thegrange.It opened slowly: a figure came out into the twilight and stood on thestep; a man without a hat: he stretched forth his hand as if to feelwhether it rained. Dusk as it was, I had recognised him—it was mymaster, Edward Fairfax Rochester, and no other.I stayed my step, almost my breath, and stood to watch him—to examinehim, myself unseen, and alas! to him invisible. It was a suddenmeeting, and one in which rapture was kept well in check by pain. I hadno difficulty in restraining my voice from exclamation, my step fromhasty advance.His form was of the same strong and stalwart contour as ever: his portwas still erect, his hair was still raven black; nor were his featuresaltered or sunk: not in one year’s space, by any sorrow, could hisathletic strength be quelled or his vigorous prime blighted. But in hiscountenance I saw a change: that looked desperate and brooding—thatreminded me of some wronged and fettered wild beast or bird, dangerousto approach in his sullen woe. The caged eagle, whose gold-ringed eyescruelty has extinguished, might look as looked that sightless Samson.And, reader, do you think I feared him in his blind ferocity?—if youdo, you little know me. A soft hope blent with my sorrow that soon Ishould dare to drop a kiss on that brow of rock, and on those lips sosternly sealed beneath it: but not yet. I would not accost him yet.He descended the one step, and advanced slowly and gropingly towardsthe grass-plat. Where was his daring stride now? Then he paused, as ifhe knew not which way to turn. He lifted his hand and opened hiseyelids; gazed blank, and with a straining effort, on the sky, andtoward the amphitheatre of trees: one saw that all to him was voiddarkness. He stretched his right hand (the left arm, the mutilated one,he kept hidden in his bosom); he seemed to wish by touch to gain anidea of what lay around him: he met but vacancy still; for the treeswere some yards off where he stood. He relinquished the endeavour,folded his arms, and stood quiet and mute in the rain, now falling faston his uncovered head. At this moment John approached him from somequarter.“Will you take my arm, sir?” he said; “there is a heavy shower comingon: had you not better go in?”“Let me alone,” was the answer.John withdrew without having observed me. Mr. Rochester now tried towalk about: vainly,—all was too uncertain. He groped his way back tothe house, and, re-entering it, closed the door.I now drew near and knocked: John’s wife opened for me. “Mary,” I said,“how are you?”She started as if she had seen a ghost: I calmed her. To her hurried“Is it really you, miss, come at this late hour to this lonely place?”I answered by taking her hand; and then I followed her into thekitchen, where John now sat by a good fire. I explained to them, in fewwords, that I had heard all which had happened since I left Thornfield,and that I was come to see Mr. Rochester. I asked John to go down tothe turn-pike-house, where I had dismissed the chaise, and bring mytrunk, which I had left there: and then, while I removed my bonnet andshawl, I questioned Mary as to whether I could be accommodated at theManor House for the night; and finding that arrangements to thateffect, though difficult, would not be impossible, I informed her Ishould stay. Just at this moment the parlour-bell rang.“When you go in,” said I, “tell your master that a person wishes tospeak to him, but do not give my name.”“I don’t think he will see you,” she answered; “he refuses everybody.”When she returned, I inquired what he had said.“You are to send in your name and your business,” she replied. She thenproceeded to fill a glass with water, and place it on a tray, togetherwith candles.“Is that what he rang for?” I asked.“Yes: he always has candles brought in at dark, though he is blind.”“Give the tray to me; I will carry it in.”I took it from her hand: she pointed me out the parlour door. The trayshook as I held it; the water spilt from the glass; my heart struck myribs loud and fast. Mary opened the door for me, and shut it behind me.This parlour looked gloomy: a neglected handful of fire burnt low inthe grate; and, leaning over it, with his head supported against thehigh, old-fashioned mantelpiece, appeared the blind tenant of the room.His old dog, Pilot, lay on one side, removed out of the way, and coiledup as if afraid of being inadvertently trodden upon. Pilot pricked uphis ears when I came in: then he jumped up with a yelp and a whine, andbounded towards me: he almost knocked the tray from my hands. I set iton the table; then patted him, and said softly, “Lie down!” Mr.Rochester turned mechanically to _see_ what the commotion was: but ashe _saw_ nothing, he returned and sighed.“Give me the water, Mary,” he said.I approached him with the now only half-filled glass; Pilot followedme, still excited.“What is the matter?” he inquired.“Down, Pilot!” I again said. He checked the water on its way to hislips, and seemed to listen: he drank, and put the glass down. “This isyou, Mary, is it not?”“Mary is in the kitchen,” I answered.He put out his hand with a quick gesture, but not seeing where I stood,he did not touch me. “Who is this? Who is this?” he demanded, trying,as it seemed, to _see_ with those sightless eyes—unavailing anddistressing attempt! “Answer me—speak again!” he ordered, imperiouslyand aloud.“Will you have a little more water, sir? I spilt half of what was inthe glass,” I said.“_Who_ is it? _What_ is it? Who speaks?”“Pilot knows me, and John and Mary know I am here. I came only thisevening,” I answered.“Great God!—what delusion has come over me? What sweet madness hasseized me?”“No delusion—no madness: your mind, sir, is too strong for delusion,your health too sound for frenzy.”“And where is the speaker? Is it only a voice? Oh! I _cannot_ see, butI must feel, or my heart will stop and my brain burst. Whatever—whoeveryou are—be perceptible to the touch or I cannot live!”He groped; I arrested his wandering hand, and prisoned it in both mine.“Her very fingers!” he cried; “her small, slight fingers! If so theremust be more of her.”The muscular hand broke from my custody; my arm was seized, myshoulder—neck—waist—I was entwined and gathered to him.“Is it Jane? _What_ is it? This is her shape—this is her size—”“And this her voice,” I added. “She is all here: her heart, too. Godbless you, sir! I am glad to be so near you again.”“Jane Eyre!—Jane Eyre,” was all he said.“My dear master,” I answered, “I am Jane Eyre: I have found you out—Iam come back to you.”“In truth?—in the flesh? My living Jane?”“You touch me, sir,—you hold me, and fast enough: I am not cold like acorpse, nor vacant like air, am I?”“My living darling! These are certainly her limbs, and these herfeatures; but I cannot be so blest, after all my misery. It is a dream;such dreams as I have had at night when I have clasped her once more tomy heart, as I do now; and kissed her, as thus—and felt that she lovedme, and trusted that she would not leave me.”“Which I never will, sir, from this day.”“Never will, says the vision? But I always woke and found it an emptymockery; and I was desolate and abandoned—my life dark, lonely,hopeless—my soul athirst and forbidden to drink—my heart famished andnever to be fed. Gentle, soft dream, nestling in my arms now, you willfly, too, as your sisters have all fled before you: but kiss me beforeyou go—embrace me, Jane.”“There, sir—and there!”’I pressed my lips to his once brilliant and now rayless eyes—I swepthis hair from his brow, and kissed that too. He suddenly seemed toarouse himself: the conviction of the reality of all this seized him.“It is you—is it, Jane? You are come back to me then?”“I am.”“And you do not lie dead in some ditch under some stream? And you arenot a pining outcast amongst strangers?”“No, sir! I am an independent woman now.”“Independent! What do you mean, Jane?”“My uncle in Madeira is dead, and he left me five thousand pounds.”“Ah! this is practical—this is real!” he cried: “I should never dreamthat. Besides, there is that peculiar voice of hers, so animating andpiquant, as well as soft: it cheers my withered heart; it puts lifeinto it.—What, Janet! Are you an independent woman? A rich woman?”“Quite rich, sir. If you won’t let me live with you, I can build ahouse of my own close up to your door, and you may come and sit in myparlour when you want company of an evening.”“But as you are rich, Jane, you have now, no doubt, friends who willlook after you, and not suffer you to devote yourself to a blindlameter like me?”“I told you I am independent, sir, as well as rich: I am my ownmistress.”“And you will stay with me?”“Certainly—unless you object. I will be your neighbour, your nurse,your housekeeper. I find you lonely: I will be your companion—to readto you, to walk with you, to sit with you, to wait on you, to be eyesand hands to you. Cease to look so melancholy, my dear master; youshall not be left desolate, so long as I live.”He replied not: he seemed serious—abstracted; he sighed; he half-openedhis lips as if to speak: he closed them again. I felt a littleembarrassed. Perhaps I had too rashly over-leaped conventionalities;and he, like St. John, saw impropriety in my inconsiderateness. I hadindeed made my proposal from the idea that he wished and would ask meto be his wife: an expectation, not the less certain becauseunexpressed, had buoyed me up, that he would claim me at once as hisown. But no hint to that effect escaping him and his countenancebecoming more overcast, I suddenly remembered that I might have beenall wrong, and was perhaps playing the fool unwittingly; and I begangently to withdraw myself from his arms—but he eagerly snatched mecloser.“No—no—Jane; you must not go. No—I have touched you, heard you, feltthe comfort of your presence—the sweetness of your consolation: Icannot give up these joys. I have little left in myself—I must haveyou. The world may laugh—may call me absurd, selfish—but it does notsignify. My very soul demands you: it will be satisfied, or it willtake deadly vengeance on its frame.”“Well, sir, I will stay with you: I have said so.”“Yes—but you understand one thing by staying with me; and I understandanother. You, perhaps, could make up your mind to be about my hand andchair—to wait on me as a kind little nurse (for you have anaffectionate heart and a generous spirit, which prompt you to makesacrifices for those you pity), and that ought to suffice for me nodoubt. I suppose I should now entertain none but fatherly feelings foryou: do you think so? Come—tell me.”“I will think what you like, sir: I am content to be only your nurse,if you think it better.”“But you cannot always be my nurse, Janet: you are young—you must marryone day.”“I don’t care about being married.”“You should care, Janet: if I were what I once was, I would try to makeyou care—but—a sightless block!”He relapsed again into gloom. I, on the contrary, became more cheerful,and took fresh courage: these last words gave me an insight as to wherethe difficulty lay; and as it was no difficulty with me, I felt quiterelieved from my previous embarrassment. I resumed a livelier vein ofconversation.“It is time some one undertook to rehumanise you,” said I, parting histhick and long uncut locks; “for I see you are being metamorphosed intoa lion, or something of that sort. You have a ‘faux air’ ofNebuchadnezzar in the fields about you, that is certain: your hairreminds me of eagles’ feathers; whether your nails are grown likebirds’ claws or not, I have not yet noticed.”“On this arm, I have neither hand nor nails,” he said, drawing themutilated limb from his breast, and showing it to me. “It is a merestump—a ghastly sight! Don’t you think so, Jane?”“It is a pity to see it; and a pity to see your eyes—and the scar offire on your forehead: and the worst of it is, one is in danger ofloving you too well for all this; and making too much of you.”“I thought you would be revolted, Jane, when you saw my arm, and mycicatrised visage.”“Did you? Don’t tell me so—lest I should say something disparaging toyour judgment. Now, let me leave you an instant, to make a better fire,and have the hearth swept up. Can you tell when there is a good fire?”“Yes; with the right eye I see a glow—a ruddy haze.”“And you see the candles?”“Very dimly—each is a luminous cloud.”“Can you see me?”“No, my fairy: but I am only too thankful to hear and feel you.”“When do you take supper?”“I never take supper.”“But you shall have some to-night. I am hungry: so are you, I daresay,only you forget.”Summoning Mary, I soon had the room in more cheerful order: I preparedhim, likewise, a comfortable repast. My spirits were excited, and withpleasure and ease I talked to him during supper, and for a long timeafter. There was no harassing restraint, no repressing of glee andvivacity with him; for with him I was at perfect ease, because I knew Isuited him; all I said or did seemed either to console or revive him.Delightful consciousness! It brought to life and light my whole nature:in his presence I thoroughly lived; and he lived in mine. Blind as hewas, smiles played over his face, joy dawned on his forehead: hislineaments softened and warmed.After supper, he began to ask me many questions, of where I had been,what I had been doing, how I had found him out; but I gave him onlyvery partial replies: it was too late to enter into particulars thatnight. Besides, I wished to touch no deep-thrilling chord—to open nofresh well of emotion in his heart: my sole present aim was to cheerhim. Cheered, as I have said, he was: and yet but by fits. If amoment’s silence broke the conversation, he would turn restless, touchme, then say, “Jane.”“You are altogether a human being, Jane? You are certain of that?”You are altogether a human being, Jane? You are certain of that?“I conscientiously believe so, Mr. Rochester.”“Yet how, on this dark and doleful evening, could you so suddenly riseon my lone hearth? I stretched my hand to take a glass of water from ahireling, and it was given me by you: I asked a question, expectingJohn’s wife to answer me, and your voice spoke at my ear.”“Because I had come in, in Mary’s stead, with the tray.”“And there is enchantment in the very hour I am now spending with you.Who can tell what a dark, dreary, hopeless life I have dragged on formonths past? Doing nothing, expecting nothing; merging night in day;feeling but the sensation of cold when I let the fire go out, of hungerwhen I forgot to eat: and then a ceaseless sorrow, and, at times, avery delirium of desire to behold my Jane again. Yes: for herrestoration I longed, far more than for that of my lost sight. How canit be that Jane is with me, and says she loves me? Will she not departas suddenly as she came? To-morrow, I fear I shall find her no more.”A commonplace, practical reply, out of the train of his own disturbedideas, was, I was sure, the best and most reassuring for him in thisframe of mind. I passed my finger over his eyebrows, and remarked thatthey were scorched, and that I would apply something which would makethem grow as broad and black as ever.“Where is the use of doing me good in any way, beneficent spirit, when,at some fatal moment, you will again desert me—passing like a shadow,whither and how to me unknown, and for me remaining afterwardsundiscoverable?”“Have you a pocket-comb about you, sir?”“What for, Jane?”“Just to comb out this shaggy black mane. I find you rather alarming,when I examine you close at hand: you talk of my being a fairy, but Iam sure, you are more like a brownie.”“Am I hideous, Jane?”“Very, sir: you always were, you know.”“Humph! The wickedness has not been taken out of you, wherever you havesojourned.”“Yet I have been with good people; far better than you: a hundred timesbetter people; possessed of ideas and views you never entertained inyour life: quite more refined and exalted.”“Who the deuce have you been with?”“If you twist in that way you will make me pull the hair out of yourhead; and then I think you will cease to entertain doubts of mysubstantiality.”“Who have you been with, Jane?”“You shall not get it out of me to-night, sir; you must wait tillto-morrow; to leave my tale half told, will, you know, be a sort ofsecurity that I shall appear at your breakfast table to finish it. Bythe bye, I must mind not to rise on your hearth with only a glass ofwater then: I must bring an egg at the least, to say nothing of friedham.”“You mocking changeling—fairy-born and human-bred! You make me feel asI have not felt these twelve months. If Saul could have had you for hisDavid, the evil spirit would have been exorcised without the aid of theharp.”“There, sir, you are redd up and made decent. Now I’ll leave you: Ihave been travelling these last three days, and I believe I am tired.Good night.”“Just one word, Jane: were there only ladies in the house where youhave been?”I laughed and made my escape, still laughing as I ran upstairs. “A goodidea!” I thought with glee. “I see I have the means of fretting him outof his melancholy for some time to come.”Very early the next morning I heard him up and astir, wandering fromone room to another. As soon as Mary came down I heard the question:“Is Miss Eyre here?” Then: “Which room did you put her into? Was itdry? Is she up? Go and ask if she wants anything; and when she willcome down.”I came down as soon as I thought there was a prospect of breakfast.Entering the room very softly, I had a view of him before he discoveredmy presence. It was mournful, indeed, to witness the subjugation ofthat vigorous spirit to a corporeal infirmity. He sat in hischair—still, but not at rest: expectant evidently; the lines of nowhabitual sadness marking his strong features. His countenance remindedone of a lamp quenched, waiting to be re-lit—and alas! it was nothimself that could now kindle the lustre of animated expression: he wasdependent on another for that office! I had meant to be gay andcareless, but the powerlessness of the strong man touched my heart tothe quick: still I accosted him with what vivacity I could.“It is a bright, sunny morning, sir,” I said. “The rain is over andgone, and there is a tender shining after it: you shall have a walksoon.”I had wakened the glow: his features beamed.“Oh, you are indeed there, my skylark! Come to me. You are not gone:not vanished? I heard one of your kind an hour ago, singing high overthe wood: but its song had no music for me, any more than the risingsun had rays. All the melody on earth is concentrated in my Jane’stongue to my ear (I am glad it is not naturally a silent one): all thesunshine I can feel is in her presence.”The water stood in my eyes to hear this avowal of his dependence; justas if a royal eagle, chained to a perch, should be forced to entreat asparrow to become its purveyor. But I would not be lachrymose: I dashedoff the salt drops, and busied myself with preparing breakfast.Most of the morning was spent in the open air. I led him out of the wetand wild wood into some cheerful fields: I described to him howbrilliantly green they were; how the flowers and hedges lookedrefreshed; how sparklingly blue was the sky. I sought a seat for him ina hidden and lovely spot, a dry stump of a tree; nor did I refuse tolet him, when seated, place me on his knee. Why should I, when both heand I were happier near than apart? Pilot lay beside us: all was quiet.He broke out suddenly while clasping me in his arms—“Cruel, cruel deserter! Oh, Jane, what did I feel when I discovered youhad fled from Thornfield, and when I could nowhere find you; and, afterexamining your apartment, ascertained that you had taken no money, noranything which could serve as an equivalent! A pearl necklace I hadgiven you lay untouched in its little casket; your trunks were leftcorded and locked as they had been prepared for the bridal tour. Whatcould my darling do, I asked, left destitute and penniless? And whatdid she do? Let me hear now.”Thus urged, I began the narrative of my experience for the last year. Isoftened considerably what related to the three days of wandering andstarvation, because to have told him all would have been to inflictunnecessary pain: the little I did say lacerated his faithful heartdeeper than I wished.I should not have left him thus, he said, without any means of makingmy way: I should have told him my intention. I should have confided inhim: he would never have forced me to be his mistress. Violent as hehad seemed in his despair, he, in truth, loved me far too well and tootenderly to constitute himself my tyrant: he would have given me halfhis fortune, without demanding so much as a kiss in return, rather thanI should have flung myself friendless on the wide world. I had endured,he was certain, more than I had confessed to him.“Well, whatever my sufferings had been, they were very short,” Ianswered: and then I proceeded to tell him how I had been received atMoor House; how I had obtained the office of schoolmistress, &c. Theaccession of fortune, the discovery of my relations, followed in dueorder. Of course, St. John Rivers’ name came in frequently in theprogress of my tale. When I had done, that name was immediately takenup.“This St. John, then, is your cousin?”“Yes.”“You have spoken of him often: do you like him?”“He was a very good man, sir; I could not help liking him.”“A good man. Does that mean a respectable well-conducted man of fifty?Or what does it mean?”“St John was only twenty-nine, sir.”“‘_Jeune encore_,’ as the French say. Is he a person of low stature,phlegmatic, and plain. A person whose goodness consists rather in hisguiltlessness of vice, than in his prowess in virtue.”“He is untiringly active. Great and exalted deeds are what he lives toperform.”“But his brain? That is probably rather soft? He means well: but youshrug your shoulders to hear him talk?”“He talks little, sir: what he does say is ever to the point. His brainis first-rate, I should think not impressible, but vigorous.”“Is he an able man, then?”“Truly able.”“A thoroughly educated man?”“St. John is an accomplished and profound scholar.”“His manners, I think, you said are not to your taste?—priggish andparsonic?”“I never mentioned his manners; but, unless I had a very bad taste,they must suit it; they are polished, calm, and gentlemanlike.”“His appearance,—I forget what description you gave of hisappearance;—a sort of raw curate, half strangled with his whiteneckcloth, and stilted up on his thick-soled high-lows, eh?”“St. John dresses well. He is a handsome man: tall, fair, with blueeyes, and a Grecian profile.”(Aside.) “Damn him!”—(To me.) “Did you like him, Jane?”“Yes, Mr. Rochester, I liked him: but you asked me that before.”I perceived, of course, the drift of my interlocutor. Jealousy had gothold of him: she stung him; but the sting was salutary: it gave himrespite from the gnawing fang of melancholy. I would not, therefore,immediately charm the snake.“Perhaps you would rather not sit any longer on my knee, Miss Eyre?”was the next somewhat unexpected observation.“Why not, Mr. Rochester?”“The picture you have just drawn is suggestive of a rather toooverwhelming contrast. Your words have delineated very prettily agraceful Apollo: he is present to your imagination,—tall, fair,blue-eyed, and with a Grecian profile. Your eyes dwell on a Vulcan,—areal blacksmith, brown, broad-shouldered: and blind and lame into thebargain.”“I never thought of it, before; but you certainly are rather likeVulcan, sir.”“Well, you can leave me, ma’am: but before you go” (and he retained meby a firmer grasp than ever), “you will be pleased just to answer me aquestion or two.” He paused.“What questions, Mr. Rochester?”Then followed this cross-examination.“St. John made you schoolmistress of Morton before he knew you were hiscousin?”“Yes.”“You would often see him? He would visit the school sometimes?”“Daily.”“He would approve of your plans, Jane? I know they would be clever, foryou are a talented creature!”“He approved of them—yes.”“He would discover many things in you he could not have expected tofind? Some of your accomplishments are not ordinary.”“I don’t know about that.”“You had a little cottage near the school, you say: did he ever comethere to see you?”“Now and then?”“Of an evening?”“Once or twice.”A pause.“How long did you reside with him and his sisters after the cousinshipwas discovered?”“Five months.”“Did Rivers spend much time with the ladies of his family?”“Yes; the back parlour was both his study and ours: he sat near thewindow, and we by the table.”“Did he study much?”“A good deal.”“What?”“Hindostanee.”“And what did you do meantime?”“I learnt German, at first.”“Did he teach you?”“He did not understand German.”“Did he teach you nothing?”“A little Hindostanee.”“Rivers taught you Hindostanee?”“Yes, sir.”“And his sisters also?”“No.”“Only you?”“Only me.”“Did you ask to learn?”“No.”“He wished to teach you?”“Yes.”A second pause.“Why did he wish it? Of what use could Hindostanee be to you?”“He intended me to go with him to India.”“Ah! here I reach the root of the matter. He wanted you to marry him?”“He asked me to marry him.”“That is a fiction—an impudent invention to vex me.”“I beg your pardon, it is the literal truth: he asked me more thanonce, and was as stiff about urging his point as ever you could be.”“Miss Eyre, I repeat it, you can leave me. How often am I to say thesame thing? Why do you remain pertinaciously perched on my knee, when Ihave given you notice to quit?”“Because I am comfortable there.”“No, Jane, you are not comfortable there, because your heart is notwith me: it is with this cousin—this St. John. Oh, till this moment, Ithought my little Jane was all mine! I had a belief she loved me evenwhen she left me: that was an atom of sweet in much bitter. Long as wehave been parted, hot tears as I have wept over our separation, I neverthought that while I was mourning her, she was loving another! But itis useless grieving. Jane, leave me: go and marry Rivers.”“Shake me off, then, sir,—push me away, for I’ll not leave you of myown accord.”“Jane, I ever like your tone of voice: it still renews hope, it soundsso truthful. When I hear it, it carries me back a year. I forget thatyou have formed a new tie. But I am not a fool—go—”“Where must I go, sir?”“Your own way—with the husband you have chosen.”“Who is that?”“You know—this St. John Rivers.”“He is not my husband, nor ever will be. He does not love me: I do notlove him. He loves (as he _can_ love, and that is not as you love) abeautiful young lady called Rosamond. He wanted to marry me onlybecause he thought I should make a suitable missionary’s wife, whichshe would not have done. He is good and great, but severe; and, for me,cold as an iceberg. He is not like you, sir: I am not happy at hisside, nor near him, nor with him. He has no indulgence for me—nofondness. He sees nothing attractive in me; not even youth—only a fewuseful mental points.—Then I must leave you, sir, to go to him?”I shuddered involuntarily, and clung instinctively closer to my blindbut beloved master. He smiled.“What, Jane! Is this true? Is such really the state of matters betweenyou and Rivers?”“Absolutely, sir! Oh, you need not be jealous! I wanted to tease you alittle to make you less sad: I thought anger would be better thangrief. But if you wish me to love you, could you but see how much I_do_ love you, you would be proud and content. All my heart is yours,sir: it belongs to you; and with you it would remain, were fate toexile the rest of me from your presence for ever.”Again, as he kissed me, painful thoughts darkened his aspect.“My seared vision! My crippled strength!” he murmured regretfully.I caressed, in order to soothe him. I knew of what he was thinking, andwanted to speak for him, but dared not. As he turned aside his face aminute, I saw a tear slide from under the sealed eyelid, and trickledown the manly cheek. My heart swelled.“I am no better than the old lightning-struck chestnut-tree inThornfield orchard,” he remarked ere long. “And what right would thatruin have to bid a budding woodbine cover its decay with freshness?”“You are no ruin, sir—no lightning-struck tree: you are green andvigorous. Plants will grow about your roots, whether you ask them ornot, because they take delight in your bountiful shadow; and as theygrow they will lean towards you, and wind round you, because yourstrength offers them so safe a prop.”Again he smiled: I gave him comfort.“You speak of friends, Jane?” he asked.“Yes, of friends,” I answered rather hesitatingly: for I knew I meantmore than friends, but could not tell what other word to employ. Hehelped me.“Ah! Jane. But I want a wife.”“Do you, sir?”“Yes: is it news to you?”“Of course: you said nothing about it before.”“Is it unwelcome news?”“That depends on circumstances, sir—on your choice.”“Which you shall make for me, Jane. I will abide by your decision.”“Choose then, sir—_her who loves you best_.”“I will at least choose—_her I love best_. Jane, will you marry me?”“Yes, sir.”“A poor blind man, whom you will have to lead about by the hand?”“Yes, sir.”“A crippled man, twenty years older than you, whom you will have towait on?”“Yes, sir.”“Truly, Jane?”“Most truly, sir.”“Oh! my darling! God bless you and reward you!”“Mr. Rochester, if ever I did a good deed in my life—if ever I thoughta good thought—if ever I prayed a sincere and blameless prayer—if everI wished a righteous wish,—I am rewarded now. To be your wife is, forme, to be as happy as I can be on earth.”“Because you delight in sacrifice.”“Sacrifice! What do I sacrifice? Famine for food, expectation forcontent. To be privileged to put my arms round what I value—to press mylips to what I love—to repose on what I trust: is that to make asacrifice? If so, then certainly I delight in sacrifice.”“And to bear with my infirmities, Jane: to overlook my deficiencies.”“Which are none, sir, to me. I love you better now, when I can reallybe useful to you, than I did in your state of proud independence, whenyou disdained every part but that of the giver and protector.”“Hitherto I have hated to be helped—to be led: henceforth, I feel Ishall hate it no more. I did not like to put my hand into a hireling’s,but it is pleasant to feel it circled by Jane’s little fingers. Ipreferred utter loneliness to the constant attendance of servants; butJane’s soft ministry will be a perpetual joy. Jane suits me: do I suither?”“To the finest fibre of my nature, sir.”“The case being so, we have nothing in the world to wait for: we mustbe married instantly.”He looked and spoke with eagerness: his old impetuosity was rising.“We must become one flesh without any delay, Jane: there is but thelicence to get—then we marry.”“Mr. Rochester, I have just discovered the sun is far declined from itsmeridian, and Pilot is actually gone home to his dinner. Let me look atyour watch.”“Fasten it into your girdle, Janet, and keep it henceforward: I have nouse for it.”“It is nearly four o’clock in the afternoon, sir. Don’t you feelhungry?”“The third day from this must be our wedding-day, Jane. Never mind fineclothes and jewels, now: all that is not worth a fillip.”“The sun has dried up all the rain-drops, sir. The breeze is still: itis quite hot.”“Do you know, Jane, I have your little pearl necklace at this momentfastened round my bronze scrag under my cravat? I have worn it sincethe day I lost my only treasure, as a memento of her.”“We will go home through the wood: that will be the shadiest way.”He pursued his own thoughts without heeding me.“Jane! you think me, I daresay, an irreligious dog: but my heart swellswith gratitude to the beneficent God of this earth just now. He seesnot as man sees, but far clearer: judges not as man judges, but farmore wisely. I did wrong: I would have sullied my innocentflower—breathed guilt on its purity: the Omnipotent snatched it fromme. I, in my stiff-necked rebellion, almost cursed the dispensation:instead of bending to the decree, I defied it. Divine justice pursuedits course; disasters came thick on me: I was forced to pass throughthe valley of the shadow of death. _His_ chastisements are mighty; andone smote me which has humbled me for ever. You know I was proud of mystrength: but what is it now, when I must give it over to foreignguidance, as a child does its weakness? Of late, Jane—only—only oflate—I began to see and acknowledge the hand of God in my doom. I beganto experience remorse, repentance; the wish for reconcilement to myMaker. I began sometimes to pray: very brief prayers they were, butvery sincere.“Some days since: nay, I can number them—four; it was last Mondaynight, a singular mood came over me: one in which grief replacedfrenzy—sorrow, sullenness. I had long had the impression that since Icould nowhere find you, you must be dead. Late that night—perhaps itmight be between eleven and twelve o’clock—ere I retired to my drearyrest, I supplicated God, that, if it seemed good to Him, I might soonbe taken from this life, and admitted to that world to come, wherethere was still hope of rejoining Jane.“I was in my own room, and sitting by the window, which was open: itsoothed me to feel the balmy night-air; though I could see no stars andonly by a vague, luminous haze, knew the presence of a moon. I longedfor thee, Janet! Oh, I longed for thee both with soul and flesh! Iasked of God, at once in anguish and humility, if I had not been longenough desolate, afflicted, tormented; and might not soon taste blissand peace once more. That I merited all I endured, I acknowledged—thatI could scarcely endure more, I pleaded; and the alpha and omega of myheart’s wishes broke involuntarily from my lips in the words—‘Jane!Jane! Jane!’”“Did you speak these words aloud?”“I did, Jane. If any listener had heard me, he would have thought memad: I pronounced them with such frantic energy.”“And it was last Monday night, somewhere near midnight?”“Yes; but the time is of no consequence: what followed is the strangepoint. You will think me superstitious,—some superstition I have in myblood, and always had: nevertheless, this is true—true at least it isthat I heard what I now relate.“As I exclaimed ‘Jane! Jane! Jane!’ a voice—I cannot tell whence thevoice came, but I know whose voice it was—replied, ‘I am coming: waitfor me;’ and a moment after, went whispering on the wind thewords—‘Where are you?’“I’ll tell you, if I can, the idea, the picture these words opened tomy mind: yet it is difficult to express what I want to express.Ferndean is buried, as you see, in a heavy wood, where sound fallsdull, and dies unreverberating. ‘Where are you?’ seemed spoken amongstmountains; for I heard a hill-sent echo repeat the words. Cooler andfresher at the moment the gale seemed to visit my brow: I could havedeemed that in some wild, lone scene, I and Jane were meeting. Inspirit, I believe we must have met. You no doubt were, at that hour, inunconscious sleep, Jane: perhaps your soul wandered from its cell tocomfort mine; for those were your accents—as certain as I live—theywere yours!”Reader, it was on Monday night—near midnight—that I too had receivedthe mysterious summons: those were the very words by which I replied toit. I listened to Mr. Rochester’s narrative, but made no disclosure inreturn. The coincidence struck me as too awful and inexplicable to becommunicated or discussed. If I told anything, my tale would be such asmust necessarily make a profound impression on the mind of my hearer:and that mind, yet from its sufferings too prone to gloom, needed notthe deeper shade of the supernatural. I kept these things then, andpondered them in my heart.“You cannot now wonder,” continued my master, “that when you rose uponme so unexpectedly last night, I had difficulty in believing you anyother than a mere voice and vision, something that would melt tosilence and annihilation, as the midnight whisper and mountain echo hadmelted before. Now, I thank God! I know it to be otherwise. Yes, Ithank God!”He put me off his knee, rose, and reverently lifting his hat from hisbrow, and bending his sightless eyes to the earth, he stood in mutedevotion. Only the last words of the worship were audible.“I thank my Maker, that, in the midst of judgment, he has rememberedmercy. I humbly entreat my Redeemer to give me strength to leadhenceforth a purer life than I have done hitherto!”Then he stretched his hand out to be led. I took that dear hand, heldit a moment to my lips, then let it pass round my shoulder: being somuch lower of stature than he, I served both for his prop and guide. Weentered the wood, and wended homeward.CHAPTER XXXVIII—CONCLUSIONReader, I married him. A quiet wedding we had: he and I, the parson andclerk, were alone present. When we got back from church, I went intothe kitchen of the manor-house, where Mary was cooking the dinner andJohn cleaning the knives, and I said—“Mary, I have been married to Mr. Rochester this morning.” Thehousekeeper and her husband were both of that decent phlegmatic orderof people, to whom one may at any time safely communicate a remarkablepiece of news without incurring the danger of having one’s ears piercedby some shrill ejaculation, and subsequently stunned by a torrent ofwordy wonderment. Mary did look up, and she did stare at me: the ladlewith which she was basting a pair of chickens roasting at the fire, didfor some three minutes hang suspended in air; and for the same space oftime John’s knives also had rest from the polishing process: but Mary,bending again over the roast, said only—“Have you, Miss? Well, for sure!”A short time after she pursued—“I seed you go out with the master, butI didn’t know you were gone to church to be wed;” and she basted away.John, when I turned to him, was grinning from ear to ear.“I telled Mary how it would be,” he said: “I knew what Mr. Edward”(John was an old servant, and had known his master when he was thecadet of the house, therefore, he often gave him his Christian name)—“Iknew what Mr. Edward would do; and I was certain he would not wait longneither: and he’s done right, for aught I know. I wish you joy, Miss!”and he politely pulled his forelock.“Thank you, John. Mr. Rochester told me to give you and Mary this.” Iput into his hand a five-pound note. Without waiting to hear more, Ileft the kitchen. In passing the door of that sanctum some time after,I caught the words—“She’ll happen do better for him nor ony o’ t’ grand ladies.” Andagain, “If she ben’t one o’ th’ handsomest, she’s noan faâl and varrygood-natured; and i’ his een she’s fair beautiful, onybody may seethat.”I wrote to Moor House and to Cambridge immediately, to say what I haddone: fully explaining also why I had thus acted. Diana and Maryapproved the step unreservedly. Diana announced that she would justgive me time to get over the honeymoon, and then she would come and seeme.“She had better not wait till then, Jane,” said Mr. Rochester, when Iread her letter to him; “if she does, she will be too late, for ourhoneymoon will shine our life long: its beams will only fade over yourgrave or mine.”How St. John received the news, I don’t know: he never answered theletter in which I communicated it: yet six months after he wrote to me,without, however, mentioning Mr. Rochester’s name or alluding to mymarriage. His letter was then calm, and, though very serious, kind. Hehas maintained a regular, though not frequent, correspondence eversince: he hopes I am happy, and trusts I am not of those who livewithout God in the world, and only mind earthly things.You have not quite forgotten little Adèle, have you, reader? I had not;I soon asked and obtained leave of Mr. Rochester, to go and see her atthe school where he had placed her. Her frantic joy at beholding meagain moved me much. She looked pale and thin: she said she was nothappy. I found the rules of the establishment were too strict, itscourse of study too severe for a child of her age: I took her home withme. I meant to become her governess once more, but I soon found thisimpracticable; my time and cares were now required by another—myhusband needed them all. So I sought out a school conducted on a moreindulgent system, and near enough to permit of my visiting her often,and bringing her home sometimes. I took care she should never want foranything that could contribute to her comfort: she soon settled in hernew abode, became very happy there, and made fair progress in herstudies. As she grew up, a sound English education corrected in a greatmeasure her French defects; and when she left school, I found in her apleasing and obliging companion: docile, good-tempered, andwell-principled. By her grateful attention to me and mine, she has longsince well repaid any little kindness I ever had it in my power tooffer her.My tale draws to its close: one word respecting my experience ofmarried life, and one brief glance at the fortunes of those whose nameshave most frequently recurred in this narrative, and I have done.I have now been married ten years. I know what it is to live entirelyfor and with what I love best on earth. I hold myself supremelyblest—blest beyond what language can express; because I am my husband’slife as fully as he is mine. No woman was ever nearer to her mate thanI am: ever more absolutely bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh. Iknow no weariness of my Edward’s society: he knows none of mine, anymore than we each do of the pulsation of the heart that beats in ourseparate bosoms; consequently, we are ever together. To be together isfor us to be at once as free as in solitude, as gay as in company. Wetalk, I believe, all day long: to talk to each other is but a moreanimated and an audible thinking. All my confidence is bestowed on him,all his confidence is devoted to me; we are precisely suited incharacter—perfect concord is the result.Mr. Rochester continued blind the first two years of our union; perhapsit was that circumstance that drew us so very near—that knit us so veryclose: for I was then his vision, as I am still his right hand.Literally, I was (what he often called me) the apple of his eye. He sawnature—he saw books through me; and never did I weary of gazing for hisbehalf, and of putting into words the effect of field, tree, town,river, cloud, sunbeam—of the landscape before us; of the weather roundus—and impressing by sound on his ear what light could no longer stampon his eye. Never did I weary of reading to him; never did I weary ofconducting him where he wished to go: of doing for him what he wishedto be done. And there was a pleasure in my services, most full, mostexquisite, even though sad—because he claimed these services withoutpainful shame or damping humiliation. He loved me so truly, that heknew no reluctance in profiting by my attendance: he felt I loved himso fondly, that to yield that attendance was to indulge my sweetestwishes.One morning at the end of the two years, as I was writing a letter tohis dictation, he came and bent over me, and said—“Jane, have you aglittering ornament round your neck?”I had a gold watch-chain: I answered “Yes.”“And have you a pale blue dress on?”And have you a pale blue dress on?I had. He informed me then, that for some time he had fancied theobscurity clouding one eye was becoming less dense; and that now he wassure of it.He and I went up to London. He had the advice of an eminent oculist;and he eventually recovered the sight of that one eye. He cannot nowsee very distinctly: he cannot read or write much; but he can find hisway without being led by the hand: the sky is no longer a blank tohim—the earth no longer a void. When his first-born was put into hisarms, he could see that the boy had inherited his own eyes, as theyonce were—large, brilliant, and black. On that occasion, he again, witha full heart, acknowledged that God had tempered judgment with mercy.My Edward and I, then, are happy: and the more so, because those wemost love are happy likewise. Diana and Mary Rivers are both married:alternately, once every year, they come to see us, and we go to seethem. Diana’s husband is a captain in the navy, a gallant officer and agood man. Mary’s is a clergyman, a college friend of her brother’s,and, from his attainments and principles, worthy of the connection.Both Captain Fitzjames and Mr. Wharton love their wives, and are lovedby them.As to St. John Rivers, he left England: he went to India. He entered onthe path he had marked for himself; he pursues it still. A moreresolute, indefatigable pioneer never wrought amidst rocks and dangers.Firm, faithful, and devoted, full of energy, and zeal, and truth, helabours for his race; he clears their painful way to improvement; hehews down like a giant the prejudices of creed and caste that encumberit. He may be stern; he may be exacting; he may be ambitious yet; buthis is the sternness of the warrior Greatheart, who guards his pilgrimconvoy from the onslaught of Apollyon. His is the exaction of theapostle, who speaks but for Christ, when he says—“Whosoever will comeafter me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me.”His is the ambition of the high master-spirit, which aims to fill aplace in the first rank of those who are redeemed from the earth—whostand without fault before the throne of God, who share the last mightyvictories of the Lamb, who are called, and chosen, and faithful.St. John is unmarried: he never will marry now. Himself has hithertosufficed to the toil, and the toil draws near its close: his glorioussun hastens to its setting. The last letter I received from him drewfrom my eyes human tears, and yet filled my heart with divine joy: heanticipated his sure reward, his incorruptible crown. I know that astranger’s hand will write to me next, to say that the good andfaithful servant has been called at length into the joy of his Lord.And why weep for this? No fear of death will darken St. John’s lasthour: his mind will be unclouded, his heart will be undaunted, his hopewill be sure, his faith steadfast. His own words are a pledge of this—“My Master,” he says, “has forewarned me. Daily He announces moredistinctly,—‘Surely I come quickly!’ and hourly I more eagerlyrespond,—‘Amen; even so come, Lord Jesus!’”*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK  JANE EYRE ******** This file should be named 1260-0.txt or 1260-0.zip *****This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:    https://www.gutenberg.org/1/2/6/1260/Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions willbe renamed.Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in theUnited States without permission and without paying copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use partof this license, apply to copying and distributing ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tmconcept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything forcopies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creationof derivative works, reports, performances and research. ProjectGutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you maydo practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protectedby U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademarklicense, especially commercial redistribution.START: FULL LICENSETHE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "ProjectGutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the FullProject Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online atwww.gutenberg.org/license.Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from theperson or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph1.E.8.1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("theFoundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promotingfree access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tmworks in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License whenyou share it without charge with others.1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of any work in anycountry other than the United States.1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any workon which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which thephrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, copied or distributed:  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where  you are located before using this eBook.1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work isderived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "ProjectGutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tmtrademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all worksposted with the permission of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tmLicense terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg-tm License.1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a formatother than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the officialversion posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "PlainVanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic worksprovided that:* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg  Literary Archive Foundation."* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm  works.* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of  receipt of the work.* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager ofthe Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the ProjectGutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, maycontain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Rightof Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further opportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void theremaining provisions.1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works inaccordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tmProject Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donationsfrom people in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm'sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection willremain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page atwww.gutenberg.orgSection 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive FoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state's laws.The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact information can be found at the Foundation's websiteand official page at www.gutenberg.org/contactSection 4. Information about Donations to the Project GutenbergLiterary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive withoutwidespread public support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particularstate visit www.gutenberg.org/donateWhile we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donateSection 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic worksProfessor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the ProjectGutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paperedition.Most people start at our website which has the main PG searchfacility: www.gutenberg.orgThis website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.