URL: https://www.gutenberg.org/files/3825/3825-0.txt
George Bernard Shaw
Pygmalion



﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Pygmalion, by George Bernard ShawThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States andmost other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictionswhatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the termsof the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online atwww.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, youwill have to check the laws of the country where you are located beforeusing this eBook.Title: PygmalionAuthor: George Bernard ShawRelease Date: March 1, 2003 [eBook #3825][Most recently updated: April 13, 2021]Language: EnglishCharacter set encoding: UTF-8Produced by: Eve Sobol. HTML version by Al Haines.*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PYGMALION ***TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE: In the printed version of this text, allapostrophes for contractions such as “can’t”, “wouldn’t” and “he’d”were omitted, to read as “cant”, “wouldnt”, and “hed”. This etextedition restores the omitted apostrophes.PYGMALIONBERNARD SHAW1912PREFACE TO PYGMALION.A Professor of Phonetics.As will be seen later on, Pygmalion needs, not a preface, but a sequel,which I have supplied in its due place. The English have no respect fortheir language, and will not teach their children to speak it. Theyspell it so abominably that no man can teach himself what it soundslike. It is impossible for an Englishman to open his mouth withoutmaking some other Englishman hate or despise him. German and Spanishare accessible to foreigners: English is not accessible even toEnglishmen. The reformer England needs today is an energetic phoneticenthusiast: that is why I have made such a one the hero of a popularplay. There have been heroes of that kind crying in the wilderness formany years past. When I became interested in the subject towards theend of the eighteen-seventies, Melville Bell was dead; but Alexander J.Ellis was still a living patriarch, with an impressive head alwayscovered by a velvet skull cap, for which he would apologize to publicmeetings in a very courtly manner. He and Tito Pagliardini, anotherphonetic veteran, were men whom it was impossible to dislike. HenrySweet, then a young man, lacked their sweetness of character: he wasabout as conciliatory to conventional mortals as Ibsen or SamuelButler. His great ability as a phonetician (he was, I think, the bestof them all at his job) would have entitled him to high officialrecognition, and perhaps enabled him to popularize his subject, but forhis Satanic contempt for all academic dignitaries and persons ingeneral who thought more of Greek than of phonetics. Once, in the dayswhen the Imperial Institute rose in South Kensington, and JosephChamberlain was booming the Empire, I induced the editor of a leadingmonthly review to commission an article from Sweet on the imperialimportance of his subject. When it arrived, it contained nothing but asavagely derisive attack on a professor of language and literaturewhose chair Sweet regarded as proper to a phonetic expert only. Thearticle, being libelous, had to be returned as impossible; and I had torenounce my dream of dragging its author into the limelight. When I methim afterwards, for the first time for many years, I found to myastonishment that he, who had been a quite tolerably presentable youngman, had actually managed by sheer scorn to alter his personalappearance until he had become a sort of walking repudiation of Oxfordand all its traditions. It must have been largely in his own despitethat he was squeezed into something called a Readership of phoneticsthere. The future of phonetics rests probably with his pupils, who allswore by him; but nothing could bring the man himself into any sort ofcompliance with the university, to which he nevertheless clung bydivine right in an intensely Oxonian way. I daresay his papers, if hehas left any, include some satires that may be published without toodestructive results fifty years hence. He was, I believe, not in theleast an ill-natured man: very much the opposite, I should say; but hewould not suffer fools gladly.Those who knew him will recognize in my third act the allusion to thepatent Shorthand in which he used to write postcards, and which may beacquired from a four and six-penny manual published by the ClarendonPress. The postcards which Mrs. Higgins describes are such as I havereceived from Sweet. I would decipher a sound which a cockney wouldrepresent by zerr, and a Frenchman by seu, and then write demandingwith some heat what on earth it meant. Sweet, with boundless contemptfor my stupidity, would reply that it not only meant but obviously wasthe word Result, as no other Word containing that sound, and capable ofmaking sense with the context, existed in any language spoken on earth.That less expert mortals should require fuller indications was beyondSweet’s patience. Therefore, though the whole point of his “CurrentShorthand” is that it can express every sound in the languageperfectly, vowels as well as consonants, and that your hand has to makeno stroke except the easy and current ones with which you write m, n,and u, l, p, and q, scribbling them at whatever angle comes easiest toyou, his unfortunate determination to make this remarkable and quitelegible script serve also as a Shorthand reduced it in his own practiceto the most inscrutable of cryptograms. His true objective was theprovision of a full, accurate, legible script for our noble butill-dressed language; but he was led past that by his contempt for thepopular Pitman system of Shorthand, which he called the Pitfall system.The triumph of Pitman was a triumph of business organization: there wasa weekly paper to persuade you to learn Pitman: there were cheaptextbooks and exercise books and transcripts of speeches for you tocopy, and schools where experienced teachers coached you up to thenecessary proficiency. Sweet could not organize his market in thatfashion. He might as well have been the Sybil who tore up the leaves ofprophecy that nobody would attend to. The four and six-penny manual,mostly in his lithographed handwriting, that was never vulgarlyadvertized, may perhaps some day be taken up by a syndicate and pushedupon the public as The Times pushed the Encyclopaedia Britannica; butuntil then it will certainly not prevail against Pitman. I have boughtthree copies of it during my lifetime; and I am informed by thepublishers that its cloistered existence is still a steady and healthyone. I actually learned the system two several times; and yet theshorthand in which I am writing these lines is Pitman’s. And the reasonis, that my secretary cannot transcribe Sweet, having been perforcetaught in the schools of Pitman. Therefore, Sweet railed at Pitman asvainly as Thersites railed at Ajax: his raillery, however it may haveeased his soul, gave no popular vogue to Current Shorthand. PygmalionHiggins is not a portrait of Sweet, to whom the adventure of ElizaDoolittle would have been impossible; still, as will be seen, there aretouches of Sweet in the play. With Higgins’s physique and temperamentSweet might have set the Thames on fire. As it was, he impressedhimself professionally on Europe to an extent that made his comparativepersonal obscurity, and the failure of Oxford to do justice to hiseminence, a puzzle to foreign specialists in his subject. I do notblame Oxford, because I think Oxford is quite right in demanding acertain social amenity from its nurslings (heaven knows it is notexorbitant in its requirements!); for although I well know how hard itis for a man of genius with a seriously underrated subject to maintainserene and kindly relations with the men who underrate it, and who keepall the best places for less important subjects which they professwithout originality and sometimes without much capacity for them,still, if he overwhelms them with wrath and disdain, he cannot expectthem to heap honors on him.Of the later generations of phoneticians I know little. Among themtowers the Poet Laureate, to whom perhaps Higgins may owe his Miltonicsympathies, though here again I must disclaim all portraiture. But ifthe play makes the public aware that there are such people asphoneticians, and that they are among the most important people inEngland at present, it will serve its turn.I wish to boast that Pygmalion has been an extremely successful playall over Europe and North America as well as at home. It is sointensely and deliberately didactic, and its subject is esteemed sodry, that I delight in throwing it at the heads of the wiseacres whorepeat the parrot cry that art should never be didactic. It goes toprove my contention that art should never be anything else.Finally, and for the encouragement of people troubled with accents thatcut them off from all high employment, I may add that the changewrought by Professor Higgins in the flower girl is neither impossiblenor uncommon. The modern concierge’s daughter who fulfils her ambitionby playing the Queen of Spain in Ruy Blas at the Theatre Francais isonly one of many thousands of men and women who have sloughed off theirnative dialects and acquired a new tongue. But the thing has to be donescientifically, or the last state of the aspirant may be worse than thefirst. An honest and natural slum dialect is more tolerable than theattempt of a phonetically untaught person to imitate the vulgar dialectof the golf club; and I am sorry to say that in spite of the efforts ofour Academy of Dramatic Art, there is still too much sham golfingEnglish on our stage, and too little of the noble English of ForbesRobertson.ACT ICovent Garden at 11.15 p.m. Torrents of heavy summer rain. Cab whistlesblowing frantically in all directions. Pedestrians running for shelterinto the market and under the portico of St. Paul’s Church, where thereare already several people, among them a lady and her daughter inevening dress. They are all peering out gloomily at the rain, exceptone man with his back turned to the rest, who seems wholly preoccupiedwith a notebook in which he is writing busily.The church clock strikes the first quarter.THE DAUGHTER [in the space between the central pillars, close to theone on her left] I’m getting chilled to the bone. What can Freddy bedoing all this time? He’s been gone twenty minutes.THE MOTHER [on her daughter’s right] Not so long. But he ought to havegot us a cab by this.A BYSTANDER [on the lady’s right] He won’t get no cab not untilhalf-past eleven, missus, when they come back after dropping theirtheatre fares.THE MOTHER. But we must have a cab. We can’t stand here until half-pasteleven. It’s too bad.THE BYSTANDER. Well, it ain’t my fault, missus.THE DAUGHTER. If Freddy had a bit of gumption, he would have got one atthe theatre door.THE MOTHER. What could he have done, poor boy?THE DAUGHTER. Other people got cabs. Why couldn’t he?Freddy rushes in out of the rain from the Southampton Street side, andcomes between them closing a dripping umbrella. He is a young man oftwenty, in evening dress, very wet around the ankles.THE DAUGHTER. Well, haven’t you got a cab?FREDDY. There’s not one to be had for love or money.THE MOTHER. Oh, Freddy, there must be one. You can’t have tried.THE DAUGHTER. It’s too tiresome. Do you expect us to go and get oneourselves?FREDDY. I tell you they’re all engaged. The rain was so sudden: nobodywas prepared; and everybody had to take a cab. I’ve been to CharingCross one way and nearly to Ludgate Circus the other; and they were allengaged.THE MOTHER. Did you try Trafalgar Square?FREDDY. There wasn’t one at Trafalgar Square.THE DAUGHTER. Did you try?FREDDY. I tried as far as Charing Cross Station. Did you expect me towalk to Hammersmith?THE DAUGHTER. You haven’t tried at all.THE MOTHER. You really are very helpless, Freddy. Go again; and don’tcome back until you have found a cab.FREDDY. I shall simply get soaked for nothing.THE DAUGHTER. And what about us? Are we to stay here all night in thisdraught, with next to nothing on. You selfish pig—FREDDY. Oh, very well: I’ll go, I’ll go. [He opens his umbrella anddashes off Strandwards, but comes into collision with a flower girl,who is hurrying in for shelter, knocking her basket out of her hands. Ablinding flash of lightning, followed instantly by a rattling peal ofthunder, orchestrates the incident]THE FLOWER GIRL. Nah then, Freddy: look wh’ y’ gowin, deah.FREDDY. Sorry [he rushes off].THE FLOWER GIRL [picking up her scattered flowers and replacing them inthe basket] There’s menners f’ yer! Te-oo banches o voylets trod intothe mad. [She sits down on the plinth of the column, sorting herflowers, on the lady’s right. She is not at all an attractive person.She is perhaps eighteen, perhaps twenty, hardly older. She wears alittle sailor hat of black straw that has long been exposed to the dustand soot of London and has seldom if ever been brushed. Her hair needswashing rather badly: its mousy color can hardly be natural. She wearsa shoddy black coat that reaches nearly to her knees and is shaped toher waist. She has a brown skirt with a coarse apron. Her boots aremuch the worse for wear. She is no doubt as clean as she can afford tobe; but compared to the ladies she is very dirty. Her features are noworse than theirs; but their condition leaves something to be desired;and she needs the services of a dentist].THE MOTHER. How do you know that my son’s name is Freddy, pray?THE FLOWER GIRL. Ow, eez ye-ooa san, is e? Wal, fewd dan y’ de-ootybawmz a mather should, eed now bettern to spawl a pore gel’s flahrznthan ran awy atbaht pyin. Will ye-oo py me f’them? [Here, withapologies, this desperate attempt to represent her dialect without aphonetic alphabet must be abandoned as unintelligible outside London.]THE DAUGHTER. Do nothing of the sort, mother. The idea!THE MOTHER. Please allow me, Clara. Have you any pennies?THE DAUGHTER. No. I’ve nothing smaller than sixpence.THE FLOWER GIRL [hopefully] I can give you change for a tanner, kindlady.THE MOTHER [to Clara] Give it to me. [Clara parts reluctantly]. Now [tothe girl] This is for your flowers.THE FLOWER GIRL. Thank you kindly, lady.THE DAUGHTER. Make her give you the change. These things are only apenny a bunch.THE MOTHER. Do hold your tongue, Clara. [To the girl]. You can keep thechange.THE FLOWER GIRL. Oh, thank you, lady.THE MOTHER. Now tell me how you know that young gentleman’s name.THE FLOWER GIRL. I didn’t.THE MOTHER. I heard you call him by it. Don’t try to deceive me.THE FLOWER GIRL [protesting] Who’s trying to deceive you? I called himFreddy or Charlie same as you might yourself if you was talking to astranger and wished to be pleasant. [She sits down beside her basket].THE DAUGHTER. Sixpence thrown away! Really, mamma, you might havespared Freddy that. [She retreats in disgust behind the pillar].An elderly gentleman of the amiable military type rushes into shelter,and closes a dripping umbrella. He is in the same plight as Freddy,very wet about the ankles. He is in evening dress, with a lightovercoat. He takes the place left vacant by the daughter’s retirement.THE GENTLEMAN. Phew!THE MOTHER [to the gentleman] Oh, sir, is there any sign of itsstopping?THE GENTLEMAN. I’m afraid not. It started worse than ever about twominutes ago. [He goes to the plinth beside the flower girl; puts up hisfoot on it; and stoops to turn down his trouser ends].THE MOTHER. Oh, dear! [She retires sadly and joins her daughter].THE FLOWER GIRL [taking advantage of the military gentleman’s proximityto establish friendly relations with him]. If it’s worse it’s a signit’s nearly over. So cheer up, Captain; and buy a flower off a poorgirl.THE GENTLEMAN. I’m sorry, I haven’t any change.THE FLOWER GIRL. I can give you change, Captain,THE GENTLEMEN. For a sovereign? I’ve nothing less.THE FLOWER GIRL. Garn! Oh do buy a flower off me, Captain. I can changehalf-a-crown. Take this for tuppence.THE GENTLEMAN. Now don’t be troublesome: there’s a good girl. [Tryinghis pockets] I really haven’t any change—Stop: here’s three hapence,if that’s any use to you [he retreats to the other pillar].THE FLOWER GIRL [disappointed, but thinking three halfpence better thannothing] Thank you, sir.THE BYSTANDER [to the girl] You be careful: give him a flower for it.There’s a bloke here behind taking down every blessed word you’resaying. [All turn to the man who is taking notes].THE FLOWER GIRL [springing up terrified] I ain’t done nothing wrong byspeaking to the gentleman. I’ve a right to sell flowers if I keep offthe kerb. [Hysterically] I’m a respectable girl: so help me, I neverspoke to him except to ask him to buy a flower off me. [General hubbub,mostly sympathetic to the flower girl, but deprecating her excessivesensibility. Cries of Don’t start hollerin. Who’s hurting you? Nobody’sgoing to touch you. What’s the good of fussing? Steady on. Easy, easy,etc., come from the elderly staid spectators, who pat her comfortingly.Less patient ones bid her shut her head, or ask her roughly what iswrong with her. A remoter group, not knowing what the matter is, crowdin and increase the noise with question and answer: What’s the row?What she do? Where is he? A tec taking her down. What! him? Yes: himover there: Took money off the gentleman, etc. The flower girl,distraught and mobbed, breaks through them to the gentleman, cryingmildly] Oh, sir, don’t let him charge me. You dunno what it means tome. They’ll take away my character and drive me on the streets forspeaking to gentlemen. They—THE NOTE TAKER [coming forward on her right, the rest crowding afterhim] There, there, there, there! Who’s hurting you, you silly girl?What do you take me for?THE BYSTANDER. It’s all right: he’s a gentleman: look at his boots.[Explaining to the note taker] She thought you was a copper’s nark, sir.THE NOTE TAKER [with quick interest] What’s a copper’s nark?THE BYSTANDER [inept at definition] It’s a—well, it’s a copper’s nark,as you might say. What else would you call it? A sort of informer.THE FLOWER GIRL [still hysterical] I take my Bible oath I never said aword—THE NOTE TAKER [overbearing but good-humored] Oh, shut up, shut up. DoI look like a policeman?THE FLOWER GIRL [far from reassured] Then what did you take down mywords for? How do I know whether you took me down right? You just showme what you’ve wrote about me. [The note taker opens his book and holdsit steadily under her nose, though the pressure of the mob trying toread it over his shoulders would upset a weaker man]. What’s that? Thatain’t proper writing. I can’t read that.THE NOTE TAKER. I can. [Reads, reproducing her pronunciation exactly]“Cheer ap, Keptin; n’ haw ya flahr orf a pore gel.”THE FLOWER GIRL [much distressed] It’s because I called him Captain. Imeant no harm. [To the gentleman] Oh, sir, don’t let him lay a chargeagen me for a word like that. You—THE GENTLEMAN. Charge! I make no charge. [To the note taker] Really,sir, if you are a detective, you need not begin protecting me againstmolestation by young women until I ask you. Anybody could see that thegirl meant no harm.THE BYSTANDERS GENERALLY [demonstrating against police espionage]Course they could. What business is it of yours? You mind your ownaffairs. He wants promotion, he does. Taking down people’s words! Girlnever said a word to him. What harm if she did? Nice thing a girl can’tshelter from the rain without being insulted, etc., etc., etc. [She isconducted by the more sympathetic demonstrators back to her plinth,where she resumes her seat and struggles with her emotion].THE BYSTANDER. He ain’t a tec. He’s a blooming busybody: that’s what heis. I tell you, look at his boots.THE NOTE TAKER [turning on him genially] And how are all your peopledown at Selsey?THE BYSTANDER [suspiciously] Who told you my people come from Selsey?THE NOTE TAKER. Never you mind. They did. [To the girl] How do you cometo be up so far east? You were born in Lisson Grove.THE FLOWER GIRL [appalled] Oh, what harm is there in my leaving LissonGrove? It wasn’t fit for a pig to live in; and I had to payfour-and-six a week. [In tears] Oh, boo—hoo—oo—THE NOTE TAKER. Live where you like; but stop that noise.THE GENTLEMAN [to the girl] Come, come! he can’t touch you: you have aright to live where you please.A SARCASTIC BYSTANDER [thrusting himself between the note taker and thegentleman] Park Lane, for instance. I’d like to go into the HousingQuestion with you, I would.THE FLOWER GIRL [subsiding into a brooding melancholy over her basket,and talking very low-spiritedly to herself] I’m a good girl, I am.THE SARCASTIC BYSTANDER [not attending to her] Do you know where _I_come from?THE NOTE TAKER [promptly] Hoxton.Titterings. Popular interest in the note taker’s performance increases.THE SARCASTIC ONE [amazed] Well, who said I didn’t? Bly me! You knoweverything, you do.THE FLOWER GIRL [still nursing her sense of injury] Ain’t no call tomeddle with me, he ain’t.THE BYSTANDER [to her] Of course he ain’t. Don’t you stand it from him.[To the note taker] See here: what call have you to know about peoplewhat never offered to meddle with you? Where’s your warrant?SEVERAL BYSTANDERS [encouraged by this seeming point of law] Yes:where’s your warrant?THE FLOWER GIRL. Let him say what he likes. I don’t want to have notruck with him.THE BYSTANDER. You take us for dirt under your feet, don’t you? Catchyou taking liberties with a gentleman!THE SARCASTIC BYSTANDER. Yes: tell HIM where he come from if you wantto go fortune-telling.THE NOTE TAKER. Cheltenham, Harrow, Cambridge, and India.THE GENTLEMAN. Quite right. [Great laughter. Reaction in the notetaker’s favor. Exclamations of He knows all about it. Told him proper.Hear him tell the toff where he come from? etc.]. May I ask, sir, doyou do this for your living at a music hall?THE NOTE TAKER. I’ve thought of that. Perhaps I shall some day.The rain has stopped; and the persons on the outside of the crowd beginto drop off.THE FLOWER GIRL [resenting the reaction] He’s no gentleman, he ain’t,to interfere with a poor girl.THE DAUGHTER [out of patience, pushing her way rudely to the front anddisplacing the gentleman, who politely retires to the other side of thepillar] What on earth is Freddy doing? I shall get pneumonia if I stayin this draught any longer.THE NOTE TAKER [to himself, hastily making a note of her pronunciationof “monia”] Earlscourt.THE DAUGHTER [violently] Will you please keep your impertinent remarksto yourself?THE NOTE TAKER. Did I say that out loud? I didn’t mean to. I beg yourpardon. Your mother’s Epsom, unmistakeably.THE MOTHER [advancing between her daughter and the note taker] How verycurious! I was brought up in Largelady Park, near Epsom.THE NOTE TAKER [uproariously amused] Ha! ha! What a devil of a name!Excuse me. [To the daughter] You want a cab, do you?THE DAUGHTER. Don’t dare speak to me.THE MOTHER. Oh, please, please Clara. [Her daughter repudiates her withan angry shrug and retires haughtily.] We should be so grateful to you,sir, if you found us a cab. [The note taker produces a whistle]. Oh,thank you. [She joins her daughter]. The note taker blows a piercingblast.THE SARCASTIC BYSTANDER. There! I knowed he was a plain-clothes copper.THE BYSTANDER. That ain’t a police whistle: that’s a sporting whistle.THE FLOWER GIRL [still preoccupied with her wounded feelings] He’s noright to take away my character. My character is the same to me as anylady’s.THE NOTE TAKER. I don’t know whether you’ve noticed it; but the rainstopped about two minutes ago.THE BYSTANDER. So it has. Why didn’t you say so before? and us losingour time listening to your silliness. [He walks off towards the Strand].THE SARCASTIC BYSTANDER. I can tell where you come from. You come fromAnwell. Go back there.THE NOTE TAKER [helpfully] _H_anwell.THE SARCASTIC BYSTANDER [affecting great distinction of speech] Thenkyou, teacher. Haw haw! So long [he touches his hat with mock respectand strolls off].THE FLOWER GIRL. Frightening people like that! How would he like ithimself.THE MOTHER. It’s quite fine now, Clara. We can walk to a motor bus.Come. [She gathers her skirts above her ankles and hurries off towardsthe Strand].THE DAUGHTER. But the cab—[her mother is out of hearing]. Oh, howtiresome! [She follows angrily].All the rest have gone except the note taker, the gentleman, and theflower girl, who sits arranging her basket, and still pitying herselfin murmurs.THE FLOWER GIRL. Poor girl! Hard enough for her to live without beingworrited and chivied.THE GENTLEMAN [returning to his former place on the note taker’s left]How do you do it, if I may ask?THE NOTE TAKER. Simply phonetics. The science of speech. That’s myprofession; also my hobby. Happy is the man who can make a living byhis hobby! You can spot an Irishman or a Yorkshireman by his brogue. Ican place any man within six miles. I can place him within two miles inLondon. Sometimes within two streets.THE FLOWER GIRL. Ought to be ashamed of himself, unmanly coward!THE GENTLEMAN. But is there a living in that?THE NOTE TAKER. Oh yes. Quite a fat one. This is an age of upstarts.Men begin in Kentish Town with 80 pounds a year, and end in Park Lanewith a hundred thousand. They want to drop Kentish Town; but they givethemselves away every time they open their mouths. Now I can teachthem—THE FLOWER GIRL. Let him mind his own business and leave a poor girl—THE NOTE TAKER [explosively] Woman: cease this detestable boohooinginstantly; or else seek the shelter of some other place of worship.THE FLOWER GIRL [with feeble defiance] I’ve a right to be here if Ilike, same as you.THE NOTE TAKER. A woman who utters such depressing and disgustingsounds has no right to be anywhere—no right to live. Remember that youare a human being with a soul and the divine gift of articulate speech:that your native language is the language of Shakespear and Milton andThe Bible; and don’t sit there crooning like a bilious pigeon.THE FLOWER GIRL [quite overwhelmed, and looking up at him in mingledwonder and deprecation without daring to raise her head]Ah—ah—ah—ow—ow—oo!THE NOTE TAKER [whipping out his book] Heavens! what a sound! [Hewrites; then holds out the book and reads, reproducing her vowelsexactly] Ah—ah—ah—ow—ow—ow—oo!THE FLOWER GIRL [tickled by the performance, and laughing in spite ofherself] Garn!THE NOTE TAKER. You see this creature with her kerbstone English: theEnglish that will keep her in the gutter to the end of her days. Well,sir, in three months I could pass that girl off as a duchess at anambassador’s garden party. I could even get her a place as lady’s maidor shop assistant, which requires better English. That’s the sort ofthing I do for commercial millionaires. And on the profits of it I dogenuine scientific work in phonetics, and a little as a poet onMiltonic lines.THE GENTLEMAN. I am myself a student of Indian dialects; and—THE NOTE TAKER [eagerly] Are you? Do you know Colonel Pickering, theauthor of Spoken Sanscrit?THE GENTLEMAN. I am Colonel Pickering. Who are you?THE NOTE TAKER. Henry Higgins, author of Higgins’s Universal Alphabet.PICKERING [with enthusiasm] I came from India to meet you.HIGGINS. I was going to India to meet you.PICKERING. Where do you live?HIGGINS. 27A Wimpole Street. Come and see me tomorrow.PICKERING. I’m at the Carlton. Come with me now and let’s have a jawover some supper.HIGGINS. Right you are.THE FLOWER GIRL [to Pickering, as he passes her] Buy a flower, kindgentleman. I’m short for my lodging.PICKERING. I really haven’t any change. I’m sorry [he goes away].HIGGINS [shocked at girl’s mendacity] Liar. You said you could changehalf-a-crown.THE FLOWER GIRL [rising in desperation] You ought to be stuffed withnails, you ought. [Flinging the basket at his feet] Take the wholeblooming basket for sixpence.The church clock strikes the second quarter.HIGGINS [hearing in it the voice of God, rebuking him for his Pharisaicwant of charity to the poor girl] A reminder. [He raises his hatsolemnly; then throws a handful of money into the basket and followsPickering].THE FLOWER GIRL [picking up a half-crown] Ah—ow—ooh! [Picking up acouple of florins] Aaah—ow—ooh! [Picking up several coins]Aaaaaah—ow—ooh! [Picking up a half-sovereign]Aasaaaaaaaaah—ow—ooh!!!FREDDY [springing out of a taxicab] Got one at last. Hallo! [To thegirl] Where are the two ladies that were here?THE FLOWER GIRL. They walked to the bus when the rain stopped.FREDDY. And left me with a cab on my hands. Damnation!THE FLOWER GIRL [with grandeur] Never you mind, young man. I’m goinghome in a taxi. [She sails off to the cab. The driver puts his handbehind him and holds the door firmly shut against her. Quiteunderstanding his mistrust, she shows him her handful of money].Eightpence ain’t no object to me, Charlie. [He grins and opens thedoor]. Angel Court, Drury Lane, round the corner of Micklejohn’s oilshop. Let’s see how fast you can make her hop it. [She gets in andpulls the door to with a slam as the taxicab starts].FREDDY. Well, I’m dashed!ACT IINext day at 11 a.m. Higgins’s laboratory in Wimpole Street. It is aroom on the first floor, looking on the street, and was meant for thedrawing-room. The double doors are in the middle of the back hall; andpersons entering find in the corner to their right two tall filecabinets at right angles to one another against the walls. In thiscorner stands a flat writing-table, on which are a phonograph, alaryngoscope, a row of tiny organ pipes with a bellows, a set of lampchimneys for singing flames with burners attached to a gas plug in thewall by an indiarubber tube, several tuning-forks of different sizes, alife-size image of half a human head, showing in section the vocalorgans, and a box containing a supply of wax cylinders for thephonograph.Further down the room, on the same side, is a fireplace, with acomfortable leather-covered easy-chair at the side of the hearthnearest the door, and a coal-scuttle. There is a clock on themantelpiece. Between the fireplace and the phonograph table is a standfor newspapers.On the other side of the central door, to the left of the visitor, is acabinet of shallow drawers. On it is a telephone and the telephonedirectory. The corner beyond, and most of the side wall, is occupied bya grand piano, with the keyboard at the end furthest from the door, anda bench for the player extending the full length of the keyboard. Onthe piano is a dessert dish heaped with fruit and sweets, mostlychocolates.The middle of the room is clear. Besides the easy chair, the pianobench, and two chairs at the phonograph table, there is one straychair. It stands near the fireplace. On the walls, engravings; mostlyPiranesis and mezzotint portraits. No paintings.Pickering is seated at the table, putting down some cards and atuning-fork which he has been using. Higgins is standing up near him,closing two or three file drawers which are hanging out. He appears inthe morning light as a robust, vital, appetizing sort of man of fortyor thereabouts, dressed in a professional-looking black frock-coat witha white linen collar and black silk tie. He is of the energetic,scientific type, heartily, even violently interested in everything thatcan be studied as a scientific subject, and careless about himself andother people, including their feelings. He is, in fact, but for hisyears and size, rather like a very impetuous baby “taking notice”eagerly and loudly, and requiring almost as much watching to keep himout of unintended mischief. His manner varies from genial bullying whenhe is in a good humor to stormy petulance when anything goes wrong; buthe is so entirely frank and void of malice that he remains likeableeven in his least reasonable moments.HIGGINS [as he shuts the last drawer] Well, I think that’s the wholeshow.PICKERING. It’s really amazing. I haven’t taken half of it in, you know.HIGGINS. Would you like to go over any of it again?PICKERING [rising and coming to the fireplace, where he plants himselfwith his back to the fire] No, thank you; not now. I’m quite done upfor this morning.HIGGINS [following him, and standing beside him on his left] Tired oflistening to sounds?PICKERING. Yes. It’s a fearful strain. I rather fancied myself becauseI can pronounce twenty-four distinct vowel sounds; but your hundred andthirty beat me. I can’t hear a bit of difference between most of them.HIGGINS [chuckling, and going over to the piano to eat sweets] Oh, thatcomes with practice. You hear no difference at first; but you keep onlistening, and presently you find they’re all as different as A from B.[Mrs. Pearce looks in: she is Higgins’s housekeeper] What’s the matter?MRS. PEARCE [hesitating, evidently perplexed] A young woman wants tosee you, sir.HIGGINS. A young woman! What does she want?MRS. PEARCE. Well, sir, she says you’ll be glad to see her when youknow what she’s come about. She’s quite a common girl, sir. Very commonindeed. I should have sent her away, only I thought perhaps you wantedher to talk into your machines. I hope I’ve not done wrong; but reallyyou see such queer people sometimes—you’ll excuse me, I’m sure, sir—HIGGINS. Oh, that’s all right, Mrs. Pearce. Has she an interestingaccent?MRS. PEARCE. Oh, something dreadful, sir, really. I don’t know how youcan take an interest in it.HIGGINS [to Pickering] Let’s have her up. Show her up, Mrs. Pearce [herushes across to his working table and picks out a cylinder to use onthe phonograph].MRS. PEARCE [only half resigned to it] Very well, sir. It’s for you tosay. [She goes downstairs].HIGGINS. This is rather a bit of luck. I’ll show you how I makerecords. We’ll set her talking; and I’ll take it down first in Bell’svisible Speech; then in broad Romic; and then we’ll get her on thephonograph so that you can turn her on as often as you like with thewritten transcript before you.MRS. PEARCE [returning] This is the young woman, sir.The flower girl enters in state. She has a hat with three ostrichfeathers, orange, sky-blue, and red. She has a nearly clean apron, andthe shoddy coat has been tidied a little. The pathos of this deplorablefigure, with its innocent vanity and consequential air, touchesPickering, who has already straightened himself in the presence of Mrs.Pearce. But as to Higgins, the only distinction he makes between menand women is that when he is neither bullying nor exclaiming to theheavens against some featherweight cross, he coaxes women as a childcoaxes its nurse when it wants to get anything out of her.HIGGINS [brusquely, recognizing her with unconcealed disappointment,and at once, baby-like, making an intolerable grievance of it] Why,this is the girl I jotted down last night. She’s no use: I’ve got allthe records I want of the Lisson Grove lingo; and I’m not going towaste another cylinder on it. [To the girl] Be off with you: I don’twant you.THE FLOWER GIRL. Don’t you be so saucy. You ain’t heard what I come foryet. [To Mrs. Pearce, who is waiting at the door for furtherinstruction] Did you tell him I come in a taxi?MRS. PEARCE. Nonsense, girl! what do you think a gentleman like Mr.Higgins cares what you came in?THE FLOWER GIRL. Oh, we are proud! He ain’t above giving lessons, nothim: I heard him say so. Well, I ain’t come here to ask for anycompliment; and if my money’s not good enough I can go elsewhere.HIGGINS. Good enough for what?THE FLOWER GIRL. Good enough for ye—oo. Now you know, don’t you? I’mcome to have lessons, I am. And to pay for em too: make no mistake.HIGGINS [stupent] WELL!!! [Recovering his breath with a gasp] What doyou expect me to say to you?THE FLOWER GIRL. Well, if you was a gentleman, you might ask me to sitdown, I think. Don’t I tell you I’m bringing you business?HIGGINS. Pickering: shall we ask this baggage to sit down or shall wethrow her out of the window?THE FLOWER GIRL [running away in terror to the piano, where she turnsat bay] Ah—ah—ah—ow—ow—ow—oo! [Wounded and whimpering] I won’t becalled a baggage when I’ve offered to pay like any lady.Motionless, the two men stare at her from the other side of the room,amazed.PICKERING [gently] What is it you want, my girl?THE FLOWER GIRL. I want to be a lady in a flower shop stead of sellingat the corner of Tottenham Court Road. But they won’t take me unless Ican talk more genteel. He said he could teach me. Well, here I am readyto pay him—not asking any favor—and he treats me as if I was dirt.MRS. PEARCE. How can you be such a foolish ignorant girl as to thinkyou could afford to pay Mr. Higgins?THE FLOWER GIRL. Why shouldn’t I? I know what lessons cost as well asyou do; and I’m ready to pay.HIGGINS. How much?THE FLOWER GIRL [coming back to him, triumphant] Now you’re talking! Ithought you’d come off it when you saw a chance of getting back a bitof what you chucked at me last night. [Confidentially] You’d had a dropin, hadn’t you?HIGGINS [peremptorily] Sit down.THE FLOWER GIRL. Oh, if you’re going to make a compliment of it—HIGGINS [thundering at her] Sit down.MRS. PEARCE [severely] Sit down, girl. Do as you’re told. [She placesthe stray chair near the hearthrug between Higgins and Pickering, andstands behind it waiting for the girl to sit down].THE FLOWER GIRL. Ah—ah—ah—ow—ow—oo! [She stands, half rebellious,half bewildered].PICKERING [very courteous] Won’t you sit down?LIZA [coyly] Don’t mind if I do. [She sits down. Pickering returns tothe hearthrug].HIGGINS. What’s your name?THE FLOWER GIRL. Liza Doolittle.HIGGINS [declaiming gravely]       Eliza, Elizabeth, Betsy and Bess,       They went to the woods to get a bird’s nes’:PICKERING. They found a nest with four eggs in it:HIGGINS. They took one apiece, and left three in it.They laugh heartily at their own wit.LIZA. Oh, don’t be silly.MRS. PEARCE. You mustn’t speak to the gentleman like that.LIZA. Well, why won’t he speak sensible to me?HIGGINS. Come back to business. How much do you propose to pay me forthe lessons?LIZA. Oh, I know what’s right. A lady friend of mine gets Frenchlessons for eighteenpence an hour from a real French gentleman. Well,you wouldn’t have the face to ask me the same for teaching me my ownlanguage as you would for French; so I won’t give more than a shilling.Take it or leave it.HIGGINS [walking up and down the room, rattling his keys and his cashin his pockets] You know, Pickering, if you consider a shilling, not asa simple shilling, but as a percentage of this girl’s income, it worksout as fully equivalent to sixty or seventy guineas from a millionaire.PICKERING. How so?HIGGINS. Figure it out. A millionaire has about 150 pounds a day. Sheearns about half-a-crown.LIZA [haughtily] Who told you I only—HIGGINS [continuing] She offers me two-fifths of her day’s income for alesson. Two-fifths of a millionaire’s income for a day would besomewhere about 60 pounds. It’s handsome. By George, it’s enormous!it’s the biggest offer I ever had.LIZA [rising, terrified] Sixty pounds! What are you talking about? Inever offered you sixty pounds. Where would I get—HIGGINS. Hold your tongue.LIZA [weeping] But I ain’t got sixty pounds. Oh—MRS. PEARCE. Don’t cry, you silly girl. Sit down. Nobody is going totouch your money.HIGGINS. Somebody is going to touch you, with a broomstick, if youdon’t stop snivelling. Sit down.LIZA [obeying slowly] Ah—ah—ah—ow—oo—o! One would think you was myfather.HIGGINS. If I decide to teach you, I’ll be worse than two fathers toyou. Here [he offers her his silk handkerchief]!LIZA. What’s this for?HIGGINS. To wipe your eyes. To wipe any part of your face that feelsmoist. Remember: that’s your handkerchief; and that’s your sleeve.Don’t mistake the one for the other if you wish to become a lady in ashop.Liza, utterly bewildered, stares helplessly at him.MRS. PEARCE. It’s no use talking to her like that, Mr. Higgins: shedoesn’t understand you. Besides, you’re quite wrong: she doesn’t do itthat way at all [she takes the handkerchief].LIZA [snatching it] Here! You give me that handkerchief. He give it tome, not to you.PICKERING [laughing] He did. I think it must be regarded as herproperty, Mrs. Pearce.MRS. PEARCE [resigning herself] Serve you right, Mr. Higgins.PICKERING. Higgins: I’m interested. What about the ambassador’s gardenparty? I’ll say you’re the greatest teacher alive if you make thatgood. I’ll bet you all the expenses of the experiment you can’t do it.And I’ll pay for the lessons.LIZA. Oh, you are real good. Thank you, Captain.HIGGINS [tempted, looking at her] It’s almost irresistible. She’s sodeliciously low—so horribly dirty—LIZA [protesting extremely] Ah—ah—ah—ah—ow—ow—oooo!!! I ain’tdirty: I washed my face and hands afore I come, I did.PICKERING. You’re certainly not going to turn her head with flattery,Higgins.MRS. PEARCE [uneasy] Oh, don’t say that, sir: there’s more ways thanone of turning a girl’s head; and nobody can do it better than Mr.Higgins, though he may not always mean it. I do hope, sir, you won’tencourage him to do anything foolish.HIGGINS [becoming excited as the idea grows on him] What is life but aseries of inspired follies? The difficulty is to find them to do. Neverlose a chance: it doesn’t come every day. I shall make a duchess ofthis draggletailed guttersnipe.LIZA [strongly deprecating this view of her] Ah—ah—ah—ow—ow—oo!HIGGINS [carried away] Yes: in six months—in three if she has a goodear and a quick tongue—I’ll take her anywhere and pass her off asanything. We’ll start today: now! this moment! Take her away and cleanher, Mrs. Pearce. Monkey Brand, if it won’t come off any other way. Isthere a good fire in the kitchen?MRS. PEARCE [protesting]. Yes; but—HIGGINS [storming on] Take all her clothes off and burn them. Ring upWhiteley or somebody for new ones. Wrap her up in brown paper till theycome.LIZA. You’re no gentleman, you’re not, to talk of such things. I’m agood girl, I am; and I know what the like of you are, I do.HIGGINS. We want none of your Lisson Grove prudery here, young woman.You’ve got to learn to behave like a duchess. Take her away, Mrs.Pearce. If she gives you any trouble wallop her.LIZA [springing up and running between Pickering and Mrs. Pearce forprotection] No! I’ll call the police, I will.MRS. PEARCE. But I’ve no place to put her.HIGGINS. Put her in the dustbin.LIZA. Ah—ah—ah—ow—ow—oo!PICKERING. Oh come, Higgins! be reasonable.MRS. PEARCE [resolutely] You must be reasonable, Mr. Higgins: reallyyou must. You can’t walk over everybody like this.Higgins, thus scolded, subsides. The hurricane is succeeded by a zephyrof amiable surprise.HIGGINS [with professional exquisiteness of modulation] I walk overeverybody! My dear Mrs. Pearce, my dear Pickering, I never had theslightest intention of walking over anyone. All I propose is that weshould be kind to this poor girl. We must help her to prepare and fitherself for her new station in life. If I did not express myselfclearly it was because I did not wish to hurt her delicacy, or yours.Liza, reassured, steals back to her chair.MRS. PEARCE [to Pickering] Well, did you ever hear anything like that,sir?PICKERING [laughing heartily] Never, Mrs. Pearce: never.HIGGINS [patiently] What’s the matter?MRS. PEARCE. Well, the matter is, sir, that you can’t take a girl uplike that as if you were picking up a pebble on the beach.HIGGINS. Why not?MRS. PEARCE. Why not! But you don’t know anything about her. What abouther parents? She may be married.LIZA. Garn!HIGGINS. There! As the girl very properly says, Garn! Married indeed!Don’t you know that a woman of that class looks a worn out drudge offifty a year after she’s married.LIZA. Who’d marry me?HIGGINS [suddenly resorting to the most thrillingly beautiful low tonesin his best elocutionary style] By George, Eliza, the streets will bestrewn with the bodies of men shooting themselves for your sake beforeI’ve done with you.MRS. PEARCE. Nonsense, sir. You mustn’t talk like that to her.LIZA [rising and squaring herself determinedly] I’m going away. He’soff his chump, he is. I don’t want no balmies teaching me.HIGGINS [wounded in his tenderest point by her insensibility to hiselocution] Oh, indeed! I’m mad, am I? Very well, Mrs. Pearce: youneedn’t order the new clothes for her. Throw her out.LIZA [whimpering] Nah—ow. You got no right to touch me.MRS. PEARCE. You see now what comes of being saucy. [Indicating thedoor] This way, please.LIZA [almost in tears] I didn’t want no clothes. I wouldn’t have takenthem [she throws away the handkerchief]. I can buy my own clothes.HIGGINS [deftly retrieving the handkerchief and intercepting her on herreluctant way to the door] You’re an ungrateful wicked girl. This is myreturn for offering to take you out of the gutter and dress youbeautifully and make a lady of you.MRS. PEARCE. Stop, Mr. Higgins. I won’t allow it. It’s you that arewicked. Go home to your parents, girl; and tell them to take bettercare of you.LIZA. I ain’t got no parents. They told me I was big enough to earn myown living and turned me out.MRS. PEARCE. Where’s your mother?LIZA. I ain’t got no mother. Her that turned me out was my sixthstepmother. But I done without them. And I’m a good girl, I am.HIGGINS. Very well, then, what on earth is all this fuss about? Thegirl doesn’t belong to anybody—is no use to anybody but me. [He goesto Mrs. Pearce and begins coaxing]. You can adopt her, Mrs. Pearce: I’msure a daughter would be a great amusement to you. Now don’t make anymore fuss. Take her downstairs; and—MRS. PEARCE. But what’s to become of her? Is she to be paid anything?Do be sensible, sir.HIGGINS. Oh, pay her whatever is necessary: put it down in thehousekeeping book. [Impatiently] What on earth will she want withmoney? She’ll have her food and her clothes. She’ll only drink if yougive her money.LIZA [turning on him] Oh you are a brute. It’s a lie: nobody ever sawthe sign of liquor on me. [She goes back to her chair and plantsherself there defiantly].PICKERING [in good-humored remonstrance] Does it occur to you, Higgins,that the girl has some feelings?HIGGINS [looking critically at her] Oh no, I don’t think so. Not anyfeelings that we need bother about. [Cheerily] Have you, Eliza?LIZA. I got my feelings same as anyone else.HIGGINS [to Pickering, reflectively] You see the difficulty?PICKERING. Eh? What difficulty?HIGGINS. To get her to talk grammar. The mere pronunciation is easyenough.LIZA. I don’t want to talk grammar. I want to talk like a lady.MRS. PEARCE. Will you please keep to the point, Mr. Higgins. I want toknow on what terms the girl is to be here. Is she to have any wages?And what is to become of her when you’ve finished your teaching? Youmust look ahead a little.HIGGINS [impatiently] What’s to become of her if I leave her in thegutter? Tell me that, Mrs. Pearce.MRS. PEARCE. That’s her own business, not yours, Mr. Higgins.HIGGINS. Well, when I’ve done with her, we can throw her back into thegutter; and then it will be her own business again; so that’s all right.LIZA. Oh, you’ve no feeling heart in you: you don’t care for nothingbut yourself [she rises and takes the floor resolutely]. Here! I’ve hadenough of this. I’m going [making for the door]. You ought to beashamed of yourself, you ought.HIGGINS [snatching a chocolate cream from the piano, his eyes suddenlybeginning to twinkle with mischief] Have some chocolates, Eliza.LIZA [halting, tempted] How do I know what might be in them? I’ve heardof girls being drugged by the like of you.Higgins whips out his penknife; cuts a chocolate in two; puts one halfinto his mouth and bolts it; and offers her the other half.HIGGINS. Pledge of good faith, Eliza. I eat one half you eat the other.[Liza opens her mouth to retort: he pops the half chocolate into it].You shall have boxes of them, barrels of them, every day. You shalllive on them. Eh?LIZA [who has disposed of the chocolate after being nearly choked byit] I wouldn’t have ate it, only I’m too ladylike to take it out of mymouth.HIGGINS. Listen, Eliza. I think you said you came in a taxi.LIZA. Well, what if I did? I’ve as good a right to take a taxi asanyone else.HIGGINS. You have, Eliza; and in future you shall have as many taxis asyou want. You shall go up and down and round the town in a taxi everyday. Think of that, Eliza.MRS. PEARCE. Mr. Higgins: you’re tempting the girl. It’s not right. Sheshould think of the future.HIGGINS. At her age! Nonsense! Time enough to think of the future whenyou haven’t any future to think of. No, Eliza: do as this lady does:think of other people’s futures; but never think of your own. Think ofchocolates, and taxis, and gold, and diamonds.LIZA. No: I don’t want no gold and no diamonds. I’m a good girl, I am.[She sits down again, with an attempt at dignity].HIGGINS. You shall remain so, Eliza, under the care of Mrs. Pearce. Andyou shall marry an officer in the Guards, with a beautiful moustache:the son of a marquis, who will disinherit him for marrying you, butwill relent when he sees your beauty and goodness—PICKERING. Excuse me, Higgins; but I really must interfere. Mrs. Pearceis quite right. If this girl is to put herself in your hands for sixmonths for an experiment in teaching, she must understand thoroughlywhat she’s doing.HIGGINS. How can she? She’s incapable of understanding anything.Besides, do any of us understand what we are doing? If we did, would weever do it?PICKERING. Very clever, Higgins; but not sound sense. [To Eliza] MissDoolittle—LIZA [overwhelmed] Ah—ah—ow—oo!HIGGINS. There! That’s all you get out of Eliza. Ah—ah—ow—oo! No useexplaining. As a military man you ought to know that. Give her herorders: that’s what she wants. Eliza: you are to live here for the nextsix months, learning how to speak beautifully, like a lady in aflorist’s shop. If you’re good and do whatever you’re told, you shallsleep in a proper bedroom, and have lots to eat, and money to buychocolates and take rides in taxis. If you’re naughty and idle you willsleep in the back kitchen among the black beetles, and be walloped byMrs. Pearce with a broomstick. At the end of six months you shall go toBuckingham Palace in a carriage, beautifully dressed. If the King findsout you’re not a lady, you will be taken by the police to the Tower ofLondon, where your head will be cut off as a warning to otherpresumptuous flower girls. If you are not found out, you shall have apresent of seven-and-sixpence to start life with as a lady in a shop.If you refuse this offer you will be a most ungrateful and wicked girl;and the angels will weep for you. [To Pickering] Now are you satisfied,Pickering? [To Mrs. Pearce] Can I put it more plainly and fairly, Mrs.Pearce?MRS. PEARCE [patiently] I think you’d better let me speak to the girlproperly in private. I don’t know that I can take charge of her orconsent to the arrangement at all. Of course I know you don’t mean herany harm; but when you get what you call interested in people’saccents, you never think or care what may happen to them or you. Comewith me, Eliza.HIGGINS. That’s all right. Thank you, Mrs. Pearce. Bundle her off tothe bath-room.LIZA [rising reluctantly and suspiciously] You’re a great bully, youare. I won’t stay here if I don’t like. I won’t let nobody wallop me. Inever asked to go to Bucknam Palace, I didn’t. I was never in troublewith the police, not me. I’m a good girl—MRS. PEARCE. Don’t answer back, girl. You don’t understand thegentleman. Come with me. [She leads the way to the door, and holds itopen for Eliza].LIZA [as she goes out] Well, what I say is right. I won’t go near theking, not if I’m going to have my head cut off. If I’d known what I wasletting myself in for, I wouldn’t have come here. I always been a goodgirl; and I never offered to say a word to him; and I don’t owe himnothing; and I don’t care; and I won’t be put upon; and I have myfeelings the same as anyone else—Mrs. Pearce shuts the door; and Eliza’s plaints are no longer audible.Pickering comes from the hearth to the chair and sits astride it withhis arms on the back.PICKERING. Excuse the straight question, Higgins. Are you a man of goodcharacter where women are concerned?HIGGINS [moodily] Have you ever met a man of good character where womenare concerned?PICKERING. Yes: very frequently.HIGGINS [dogmatically, lifting himself on his hands to the level of thepiano, and sitting on it with a bounce] Well, I haven’t. I find thatthe moment I let a woman make friends with me, she becomes jealous,exacting, suspicious, and a damned nuisance. I find that the moment Ilet myself make friends with a woman, I become selfish and tyrannical.Women upset everything. When you let them into your life, you find thatthe woman is driving at one thing and you’re driving at another.PICKERING. At what, for example?HIGGINS [coming off the piano restlessly] Oh, Lord knows! I suppose thewoman wants to live her own life; and the man wants to live his; andeach tries to drag the other on to the wrong track. One wants to gonorth and the other south; and the result is that both have to go east,though they both hate the east wind. [He sits down on the bench at thekeyboard]. So here I am, a confirmed old bachelor, and likely to remainso.PICKERING [rising and standing over him gravely] Come, Higgins! Youknow what I mean. If I’m to be in this business I shall feelresponsible for that girl. I hope it’s understood that no advantage isto be taken of her position.HIGGINS. What! That thing! Sacred, I assure you. [Rising to explain]You see, she’ll be a pupil; and teaching would be impossible unlesspupils were sacred. I’ve taught scores of American millionairesses howto speak English: the best looking women in the world. I’m seasoned.They might as well be blocks of wood. I might as well be a block ofwood. It’s—Mrs. Pearce opens the door. She has Eliza’s hat in her hand. Pickeringretires to the easy-chair at the hearth and sits down.HIGGINS [eagerly] Well, Mrs. Pearce: is it all right?MRS. PEARCE [at the door] I just wish to trouble you with a word, if Imay, Mr. Higgins.HIGGINS. Yes, certainly. Come in. [She comes forward]. Don’t burn that,Mrs. Pearce. I’ll keep it as a curiosity. [He takes the hat].MRS. PEARCE. Handle it carefully, sir, please. I had to promise her notto burn it; but I had better put it in the oven for a while.HIGGINS [putting it down hastily on the piano] Oh! thank you. Well,what have you to say to me?PICKERING. Am I in the way?MRS. PEARCE. Not at all, sir. Mr. Higgins: will you please be veryparticular what you say before the girl?HIGGINS [sternly] Of course. I’m always particular about what I say.Why do you say this to me?MRS. PEARCE [unmoved] No, sir: you’re not at all particular when you’vemislaid anything or when you get a little impatient. Now it doesn’tmatter before me: I’m used to it. But you really must not swear beforethe girl.HIGGINS [indignantly] I swear! [Most emphatically] I never swear. Idetest the habit. What the devil do you mean?MRS. PEARCE [stolidly] That’s what I mean, sir. You swear a great dealtoo much. I don’t mind your damning and blasting, and what the deviland where the devil and who the devil—HIGGINS. Really! Mrs. Pearce: this language from your lips!MRS. PEARCE [not to be put off]—but there is a certain word I must askyou not to use. The girl has just used it herself because the bath wastoo hot. It begins with the same letter as bath. She knows no better:she learnt it at her mother’s knee. But she must not hear it from yourlips.HIGGINS [loftily] I cannot charge myself with having ever uttered it,Mrs. Pearce. [She looks at him steadfastly. He adds, hiding an uneasyconscience with a judicial air] Except perhaps in a moment of extremeand justifiable excitement.MRS. PEARCE. Only this morning, sir, you applied it to your boots, tothe butter, and to the brown bread.HIGGINS. Oh, that! Mere alliteration, Mrs. Pearce, natural to a poet.MRS. PEARCE. Well, sir, whatever you choose to call it, I beg you notto let the girl hear you repeat it.HIGGINS. Oh, very well, very well. Is that all?MRS. PEARCE. No, sir. We shall have to be very particular with thisgirl as to personal cleanliness.HIGGINS. Certainly. Quite right. Most important.MRS. PEARCE. I mean not to be slovenly about her dress or untidy inleaving things about.HIGGINS [going to her solemnly] Just so. I intended to call yourattention to that [He passes on to Pickering, who is enjoying theconversation immensely]. It is these little things that matter,Pickering. Take care of the pence and the pounds will take care ofthemselves is as true of personal habits as of money. [He comes toanchor on the hearthrug, with the air of a man in an unassailableposition].MRS. PEARCE. Yes, sir. Then might I ask you not to come down tobreakfast in your dressing-gown, or at any rate not to use it as anapkin to the extent you do, sir. And if you would be so good as not toeat everything off the same plate, and to remember not to put theporridge saucepan out of your hand on the clean tablecloth, it would bea better example to the girl. You know you nearly choked yourself witha fishbone in the jam only last week.HIGGINS [routed from the hearthrug and drifting back to the piano] Imay do these things sometimes in absence of mind; but surely I don’t dothem habitually. [Angrily] By the way: my dressing-gown smells mostdamnably of benzine.MRS. PEARCE. No doubt it does, Mr. Higgins. But if you will wipe yourfingers—HIGGINS [yelling] Oh very well, very well: I’ll wipe them in my hair infuture.MRS. PEARCE. I hope you’re not offended, Mr. Higgins.HIGGINS [shocked at finding himself thought capable of an unamiablesentiment] Not at all, not at all. You’re quite right, Mrs. Pearce: Ishall be particularly careful before the girl. Is that all?MRS. PEARCE. No, sir. Might she use some of those Japanese dresses youbrought from abroad? I really can’t put her back into her old things.HIGGINS. Certainly. Anything you like. Is that all?MRS. PEARCE. Thank you, sir. That’s all. [She goes out].HIGGINS. You know, Pickering, that woman has the most extraordinaryideas about me. Here I am, a shy, diffident sort of man. I’ve neverbeen able to feel really grown-up and tremendous, like other chaps. Andyet she’s firmly persuaded that I’m an arbitrary overbearing bossingkind of person. I can’t account for it.Mrs. Pearce returns.MRS. PEARCE. If you please, sir, the trouble’s beginning already.There’s a dustman downstairs, Alfred Doolittle, wants to see you. Hesays you have his daughter here.PICKERING [rising] Phew! I say! [He retreats to the hearthrug].HIGGINS [promptly] Send the blackguard up.MRS. PEARCE. Oh, very well, sir. [She goes out].PICKERING. He may not be a blackguard, Higgins.HIGGINS. Nonsense. Of course he’s a blackguard.PICKERING. Whether he is or not, I’m afraid we shall have some troublewith him.HIGGINS [confidently] Oh no: I think not. If there’s any trouble heshall have it with me, not I with him. And we are sure to get somethinginteresting out of him.PICKERING. About the girl?HIGGINS. No. I mean his dialect.PICKERING. Oh!MRS. PEARCE [at the door] Doolittle, sir. [She admits Doolittle andretires].Alfred Doolittle is an elderly but vigorous dustman, clad in thecostume of his profession, including a hat with a back brim coveringhis neck and shoulders. He has well marked and rather interestingfeatures, and seems equally free from fear and conscience. He has aremarkably expressive voice, the result of a habit of giving vent tohis feelings without reserve. His present pose is that of wounded honorand stern resolution.DOOLITTLE [at the door, uncertain which of the two gentlemen is hisman] Professor Higgins?HIGGINS. Here. Good morning. Sit down.DOOLITTLE. Morning, Governor. [He sits down magisterially] I come abouta very serious matter, Governor.HIGGINS [to Pickering] Brought up in Hounslow. Mother Welsh, I shouldthink. [Doolittle opens his mouth, amazed. Higgins continues] What doyou want, Doolittle?DOOLITTLE [menacingly] I want my daughter: that’s what I want. See?HIGGINS. Of course you do. You’re her father, aren’t you? You don’tsuppose anyone else wants her, do you? I’m glad to see you have somespark of family feeling left. She’s upstairs. Take her away at once.DOOLITTLE [rising, fearfully taken aback] What!HIGGINS. Take her away. Do you suppose I’m going to keep your daughterfor you?DOOLITTLE [remonstrating] Now, now, look here, Governor. Is thisreasonable? Is it fair to take advantage of a man like this? The girlbelongs to me. You got her. Where do I come in? [He sits down again].HIGGINS. Your daughter had the audacity to come to my house and ask meto teach her how to speak properly so that she could get a place in aflower-shop. This gentleman and my housekeeper have been here all thetime. [Bullying him] How dare you come here and attempt to blackmailme? You sent her here on purpose.DOOLITTLE [protesting] No, Governor.HIGGINS. You must have. How else could you possibly know that she ishere?DOOLITTLE. Don’t take a man up like that, Governor.HIGGINS. The police shall take you up. This is a plant—a plot toextort money by threats. I shall telephone for the police [he goesresolutely to the telephone and opens the directory].DOOLITTLE. Have I asked you for a brass farthing? I leave it to thegentleman here: have I said a word about money?HIGGINS [throwing the book aside and marching down on Doolittle with aposer] What else did you come for?DOOLITTLE [sweetly] Well, what would a man come for? Be human, governor.HIGGINS [disarmed] Alfred: did you put her up to it?DOOLITTLE. So help me, Governor, I never did. I take my Bible oath Iain’t seen the girl these two months past.HIGGINS. Then how did you know she was here?DOOLITTLE [“most musical, most melancholy”] I’ll tell you, Governor, ifyou’ll only let me get a word in. I’m willing to tell you. I’m wantingto tell you. I’m waiting to tell you.HIGGINS. Pickering: this chap has a certain natural gift of rhetoric.Observe the rhythm of his native woodnotes wild. “I’m willing to tellyou: I’m wanting to tell you: I’m waiting to tell you.” Sentimentalrhetoric! That’s the Welsh strain in him. It also accounts for hismendacity and dishonesty.PICKERING. Oh, PLEASE, Higgins: I’m west country myself. [To Doolittle]How did you know the girl was here if you didn’t send her?DOOLITTLE. It was like this, Governor. The girl took a boy in the taxito give him a jaunt. Son of her landlady, he is. He hung about on thechance of her giving him another ride home. Well, she sent him back forher luggage when she heard you was willing for her to stop here. I metthe boy at the corner of Long Acre and Endell Street.HIGGINS. Public house. Yes?DOOLITTLE. The poor man’s club, Governor: why shouldn’t I?PICKERING. Do let him tell his story, Higgins.DOOLITTLE. He told me what was up. And I ask you, what was my feelingsand my duty as a father? I says to the boy, “You bring me the luggage,”I says—PICKERING. Why didn’t you go for it yourself?DOOLITTLE. Landlady wouldn’t have trusted me with it, Governor. She’sthat kind of woman: you know. I had to give the boy a penny afore hetrusted me with it, the little swine. I brought it to her just tooblige you like, and make myself agreeable. That’s all.HIGGINS. How much luggage?DOOLITTLE. Musical instrument, Governor. A few pictures, a trifle ofjewelry, and a bird-cage. She said she didn’t want no clothes. What wasI to think from that, Governor? I ask you as a parent what was I tothink?HIGGINS. So you came to rescue her from worse than death, eh?DOOLITTLE [appreciatively: relieved at being understood] Just so,Governor. That’s right.PICKERING. But why did you bring her luggage if you intended to takeher away?DOOLITTLE. Have I said a word about taking her away? Have I now?HIGGINS [determinedly] You’re going to take her away, double quick. [Hecrosses to the hearth and rings the bell].DOOLITTLE [rising] No, Governor. Don’t say that. I’m not the man tostand in my girl’s light. Here’s a career opening for her, as you mightsay; and—Mrs. Pearce opens the door and awaits orders.HIGGINS. Mrs. Pearce: this is Eliza’s father. He has come to take heraway. Give her to him. [He goes back to the piano, with an air ofwashing his hands of the whole affair].DOOLITTLE. No. This is a misunderstanding. Listen here—MRS. PEARCE. He can’t take her away, Mr. Higgins: how can he? You toldme to burn her clothes.DOOLITTLE. That’s right. I can’t carry the girl through the streetslike a blooming monkey, can I? I put it to you.HIGGINS. You have put it to me that you want your daughter. Take yourdaughter. If she has no clothes go out and buy her some.DOOLITTLE [desperate] Where’s the clothes she come in? Did I burn themor did your missus here?MRS. PEARCE. I am the housekeeper, if you please. I have sent for someclothes for your girl. When they come you can take her away. You canwait in the kitchen. This way, please.Doolittle, much troubled, accompanies her to the door; then hesitates;finally turns confidentially to Higgins.DOOLITTLE. Listen here, Governor. You and me is men of the world, ain’twe?HIGGINS. Oh! Men of the world, are we? You’d better go, Mrs. Pearce.MRS. PEARCE. I think so, indeed, sir. [She goes, with dignity].PICKERING. The floor is yours, Mr. Doolittle.DOOLITTLE [to Pickering] I thank you, Governor. [To Higgins, who takesrefuge on the piano bench, a little overwhelmed by the proximity of hisvisitor; for Doolittle has a professional flavor of dust about him].Well, the truth is, I’ve taken a sort of fancy to you, Governor; and ifyou want the girl, I’m not so set on having her back home again butwhat I might be open to an arrangement. Regarded in the light of ayoung woman, she’s a fine handsome girl. As a daughter she’s not worthher keep; and so I tell you straight. All I ask is my rights as afather; and you’re the last man alive to expect me to let her go fornothing; for I can see you’re one of the straight sort, Governor. Well,what’s a five pound note to you? And what’s Eliza to me? [He returns tohis chair and sits down judicially].PICKERING. I think you ought to know, Doolittle, that Mr. Higgins’sintentions are entirely honorable.DOOLITTLE. Course they are, Governor. If I thought they wasn’t, I’d askfifty.HIGGINS [revolted] Do you mean to say, you callous rascal, that youwould sell your daughter for 50 pounds?DOOLITTLE. Not in a general way I wouldn’t; but to oblige a gentlemanlike you I’d do a good deal, I do assure you.PICKERING. Have you no morals, man?DOOLITTLE [unabashed] Can’t afford them, Governor. Neither could you ifyou was as poor as me. Not that I mean any harm, you know. But if Lizais going to have a bit out of this, why not me too?HIGGINS [troubled] I don’t know what to do, Pickering. There can be noquestion that as a matter of morals it’s a positive crime to give thischap a farthing. And yet I feel a sort of rough justice in his claim.DOOLITTLE. That’s it, Governor. That’s all I say. A father’s heart, asit were.PICKERING. Well, I know the feeling; but really it seems hardly right—DOOLITTLE. Don’t say that, Governor. Don’t look at it that way. What amI, Governors both? I ask you, what am I? I’m one of the undeservingpoor: that’s what I am. Think of what that means to a man. It meansthat he’s up agen middle class morality all the time. If there’sanything going, and I put in for a bit of it, it’s always the samestory: “You’re undeserving; so you can’t have it.” But my needs is asgreat as the most deserving widow’s that ever got money out of sixdifferent charities in one week for the death of the same husband. Idon’t need less than a deserving man: I need more. I don’t eat lesshearty than him; and I drink a lot more. I want a bit of amusement,cause I’m a thinking man. I want cheerfulness and a song and a bandwhen I feel low. Well, they charge me just the same for everything asthey charge the deserving. What is middle class morality? Just anexcuse for never giving me anything. Therefore, I ask you, as twogentlemen, not to play that game on me. I’m playing straight with you.I ain’t pretending to be deserving. I’m undeserving; and I mean to goon being undeserving. I like it; and that’s the truth. Will you takeadvantage of a man’s nature to do him out of the price of his owndaughter what he’s brought up and fed and clothed by the sweat of hisbrow until she’s growed big enough to be interesting to you twogentlemen? Is five pounds unreasonable? I put it to you; and I leave itto you.HIGGINS [rising, and going over to Pickering] Pickering: if we were totake this man in hand for three months, he could choose between a seatin the Cabinet and a popular pulpit in Wales.PICKERING. What do you say to that, Doolittle?DOOLITTLE. Not me, Governor, thank you kindly. I’ve heard all thepreachers and all the prime ministers—for I’m a thinking man and gamefor politics or religion or social reform same as all the otheramusements—and I tell you it’s a dog’s life anyway you look at it.Undeserving poverty is my line. Taking one station in society withanother, it’s—it’s—well, it’s the only one that has any ginger in it,to my taste.HIGGINS. I suppose we must give him a fiver.PICKERING. He’ll make a bad use of it, I’m afraid.DOOLITTLE. Not me, Governor, so help me I won’t. Don’t you be afraidthat I’ll save it and spare it and live idle on it. There won’t be apenny of it left by Monday: I’ll have to go to work same as if I’dnever had it. It won’t pauperize me, you bet. Just one good spree formyself and the missus, giving pleasure to ourselves and employment toothers, and satisfaction to you to think it’s not been throwed away.You couldn’t spend it better.HIGGINS [taking out his pocket book and coming between Doolittle andthe piano] This is irresistible. Let’s give him ten. [He offers twonotes to the dustman].DOOLITTLE. No, Governor. She wouldn’t have the heart to spend ten; andperhaps I shouldn’t neither. Ten pounds is a lot of money: it makes aman feel prudent like; and then goodbye to happiness. You give me whatI ask you, Governor: not a penny more, and not a penny less.PICKERING. Why don’t you marry that missus of yours? I rather draw theline at encouraging that sort of immorality.DOOLITTLE. Tell her so, Governor: tell her so. I’m willing. It’s methat suffers by it. I’ve no hold on her. I got to be agreeable to her.I got to give her presents. I got to buy her clothes something sinful.I’m a slave to that woman, Governor, just because I’m not her lawfulhusband. And she knows it too. Catch her marrying me! Take my advice,Governor: marry Eliza while she’s young and don’t know no better. Ifyou don’t you’ll be sorry for it after. If you do, she’ll be sorry forit after; but better you than her, because you’re a man, and she’s onlya woman and don’t know how to be happy anyhow.HIGGINS. Pickering: if we listen to this man another minute, we shallhave no convictions left. [To Doolittle] Five pounds I think you said.DOOLITTLE. Thank you kindly, Governor.HIGGINS. You’re sure you won’t take ten?DOOLITTLE. Not now. Another time, Governor.HIGGINS [handing him a five-pound note] Here you are.DOOLITTLE. Thank you, Governor. Good morning.[He hurries to the door, anxious to get away with his booty. When heopens it he is confronted with a dainty and exquisitely clean youngJapanese lady in a simple blue cotton kimono printed cunningly withsmall white jasmine blossoms. Mrs. Pearce is with her. He gets out ofher way deferentially and apologizes]. Beg pardon, miss.THE JAPANESE LADY. Garn! Don’t you know your own daughter?  DOOLITTLE   {exclaiming  Bly me! it’s Eliza!  HIGGINS     {simul-      What’s that! This!  PICKERING   {taneously   By Jove!LIZA. Don’t I look silly?HIGGINS. Silly?MRS. PEARCE [at the door] Now, Mr. Higgins, please don’t say anythingto make the girl conceited about herself.HIGGINS [conscientiously] Oh! Quite right, Mrs. Pearce. [To Eliza] Yes:damned silly.MRS. PEARCE. Please, sir.HIGGINS [correcting himself] I mean extremely silly.LIZA. I should look all right with my hat on. [She takes up her hat;puts it on; and walks across the room to the fireplace with afashionable air].HIGGINS. A new fashion, by George! And it ought to look horrible!DOOLITTLE [with fatherly pride] Well, I never thought she’d clean up asgood looking as that, Governor. She’s a credit to me, ain’t she?LIZA. I tell you, it’s easy to clean up here. Hot and cold water ontap, just as much as you like, there is. Woolly towels, there is; and atowel horse so hot, it burns your fingers. Soft brushes to scrubyourself, and a wooden bowl of soap smelling like primroses. Now I knowwhy ladies is so clean. Washing’s a treat for them. Wish they saw whatit is for the like of me!HIGGINS. I’m glad the bath-room met with your approval.LIZA. It didn’t: not all of it; and I don’t care who hears me say it.Mrs. Pearce knows.HIGGINS. What was wrong, Mrs. Pearce?MRS. PEARCE [blandly] Oh, nothing, sir. It doesn’t matter.LIZA. I had a good mind to break it. I didn’t know which way to look.But I hung a towel over it, I did.HIGGINS. Over what?MRS. PEARCE. Over the looking-glass, sir.HIGGINS. Doolittle: you have brought your daughter up too strictly.DOOLITTLE. Me! I never brought her up at all, except to give her a lickof a strap now and again. Don’t put it on me, Governor. She ain’taccustomed to it, you see: that’s all. But she’ll soon pick up yourfree-and-easy ways.LIZA. I’m a good girl, I am; and I won’t pick up no free and easy ways.HIGGINS. Eliza: if you say again that you’re a good girl, your fathershall take you home.LIZA. Not him. You don’t know my father. All he come here for was totouch you for some money to get drunk on.DOOLITTLE. Well, what else would I want money for? To put into theplate in church, I suppose. [She puts out her tongue at him. He is soincensed by this that Pickering presently finds it necessary to stepbetween them]. Don’t you give me none of your lip; and don’t let mehear you giving this gentleman any of it neither, or you’ll hear fromme about it. See?HIGGINS. Have you any further advice to give her before you go,Doolittle? Your blessing, for instance.DOOLITTLE. No, Governor: I ain’t such a mug as to put up my children toall I know myself. Hard enough to hold them in without that. If youwant Eliza’s mind improved, Governor, you do it yourself with a strap.So long, gentlemen. [He turns to go].HIGGINS [impressively] Stop. You’ll come regularly to see yourdaughter. It’s your duty, you know. My brother is a clergyman; and hecould help you in your talks with her.DOOLITTLE [evasively] Certainly. I’ll come, Governor. Not just thisweek, because I have a job at a distance. But later on you may dependon me. Afternoon, gentlemen. Afternoon, ma’am. [He takes off his hat toMrs. Pearce, who disdains the salutation and goes out. He winks atHiggins, thinking him probably a fellow sufferer from Mrs. Pearce’sdifficult disposition, and follows her].LIZA. Don’t you believe the old liar. He’d as soon you set a bull-dogon him as a clergyman. You won’t see him again in a hurry.HIGGINS. I don’t want to, Eliza. Do you?LIZA. Not me. I don’t want never to see him again, I don’t. He’s adisgrace to me, he is, collecting dust, instead of working at his trade.PICKERING. What is his trade, Eliza?LIZA. Talking money out of other people’s pockets into his own. Hisproper trade’s a navvy; and he works at it sometimes too—forexercise—and earns good money at it. Ain’t you going to call me MissDoolittle any more?PICKERING. I beg your pardon, Miss Doolittle. It was a slip of thetongue.LIZA. Oh, I don’t mind; only it sounded so genteel. I should just liketo take a taxi to the corner of Tottenham Court Road and get out thereand tell it to wait for me, just to put the girls in their place a bit.I wouldn’t speak to them, you know.PICKERING. Better wait til we get you something really fashionable.HIGGINS. Besides, you shouldn’t cut your old friends now that you haverisen in the world. That’s what we call snobbery.LIZA. You don’t call the like of them my friends now, I should hope.They’ve took it out of me often enough with their ridicule when theyhad the chance; and now I mean to get a bit of my own back. But if I’mto have fashionable clothes, I’ll wait. I should like to have some.Mrs. Pearce says you’re going to give me some to wear in bed at nightdifferent to what I wear in the daytime; but it do seem a waste ofmoney when you could get something to show. Besides, I never couldfancy changing into cold things on a winter night.MRS. PEARCE [coming back] Now, Eliza. The new things have come for youto try on.LIZA. Ah—ow—oo—ooh! [She rushes out].MRS. PEARCE [following her] Oh, don’t rush about like that, girl [Sheshuts the door behind her].HIGGINS. Pickering: we have taken on a stiff job.PICKERING [with conviction] Higgins: we have.ACT IIIIt is Mrs. Higgins’s at-home day. Nobody has yet arrived. Herdrawing-room, in a flat on Chelsea embankment, has three windowslooking on the river; and the ceiling is not so lofty as it would be inan older house of the same pretension. The windows are open, givingaccess to a balcony with flowers in pots. If you stand with your faceto the windows, you have the fireplace on your left and the door in theright-hand wall close to the corner nearest the windows.Mrs. Higgins was brought up on Morris and Burne Jones; and her room,which is very unlike her son’s room in Wimpole Street, is not crowdedwith furniture and little tables and nicknacks. In the middle of theroom there is a big ottoman; and this, with the carpet, the Morriswall-papers, and the Morris chintz window curtains and brocade coversof the ottoman and its cushions, supply all the ornament, and are muchtoo handsome to be hidden by odds and ends of useless things. A fewgood oil-paintings from the exhibitions in the Grosvenor Gallery thirtyyears ago (the Burne Jones, not the Whistler side of them) are on thewalls. The only landscape is a Cecil Lawson on the scale of a Rubens.There is a portrait of Mrs. Higgins as she was when she defied fashionin her youth in one of the beautiful Rossettian costumes which, whencaricatured by people who did not understand, led to the absurdities ofpopular estheticism in the eighteen-seventies.In the corner diagonally opposite the door Mrs. Higgins, now over sixtyand long past taking the trouble to dress out of the fashion, sitswriting at an elegantly simple writing-table with a bell button withinreach of her hand. There is a Chippendale chair further back in theroom between her and the window nearest her side. At the other side ofthe room, further forward, is an Elizabethan chair roughly carved inthe taste of Inigo Jones. On the same side a piano in a decorated case.The corner between the fireplace and the window is occupied by a divancushioned in Morris chintz.It is between four and five in the afternoon.The door is opened violently; and Higgins enters with his hat on.MRS. HIGGINS [dismayed] Henry [scolding him]! What are you doing hereto-day? It is my at home day: you promised not to come. [As he bends tokiss her, she takes his hat off, and presents it to him].HIGGINS. Oh bother! [He throws the hat down on the table].MRS. HIGGINS. Go home at once.HIGGINS [kissing her] I know, mother. I came on purpose.MRS. HIGGINS. But you mustn’t. I’m serious, Henry. You offend all myfriends: they stop coming whenever they meet you.HIGGINS. Nonsense! I know I have no small talk; but people don’t mind.[He sits on the settee].MRS. HIGGINS. Oh! don’t they? Small talk indeed! What about your largetalk? Really, dear, you mustn’t stay.HIGGINS. I must. I’ve a job for you. A phonetic job.MRS. HIGGINS. No use, dear. I’m sorry; but I can’t get round yourvowels; and though I like to get pretty postcards in your patentshorthand, I always have to read the copies in ordinary writing you sothoughtfully send me.HIGGINS. Well, this isn’t a phonetic job.MRS. HIGGINS. You said it was.HIGGINS. Not your part of it. I’ve picked up a girl.MRS. HIGGINS. Does that mean that some girl has picked you up?HIGGINS. Not at all. I don’t mean a love affair.MRS. HIGGINS. What a pity!HIGGINS. Why?MRS. HIGGINS. Well, you never fall in love with anyone underforty-five. When will you discover that there are some rathernice-looking young women about?HIGGINS. Oh, I can’t be bothered with young women. My idea of aloveable woman is something as like you as possible. I shall never getinto the way of seriously liking young women: some habits lie too deepto be changed. [Rising abruptly and walking about, jingling his moneyand his keys in his trouser pockets] Besides, they’re all idiots.MRS. HIGGINS. Do you know what you would do if you really loved me,Henry?HIGGINS. Oh bother! What? Marry, I suppose?MRS. HIGGINS. No. Stop fidgeting and take your hands out of yourpockets. [With a gesture of despair, he obeys and sits down again].That’s a good boy. Now tell me about the girl.HIGGINS. She’s coming to see you.MRS. HIGGINS. I don’t remember asking her.HIGGINS. You didn’t. I asked her. If you’d known her you wouldn’t haveasked her.MRS. HIGGINS. Indeed! Why?HIGGINS. Well, it’s like this. She’s a common flower girl. I picked heroff the kerbstone.MRS. HIGGINS. And invited her to my at-home!HIGGINS [rising and coming to her to coax her] Oh, that’ll be allright. I’ve taught her to speak properly; and she has strict orders asto her behavior. She’s to keep to two subjects: the weather andeverybody’s health—Fine day and How do you do, you know—and not tolet herself go on things in general. That will be safe.MRS. HIGGINS. Safe! To talk about our health! about our insides!perhaps about our outsides! How could you be so silly, Henry?HIGGINS [impatiently] Well, she must talk about something. [He controlshimself and sits down again]. Oh, she’ll be all right: don’t you fuss.Pickering is in it with me. I’ve a sort of bet on that I’ll pass heroff as a duchess in six months. I started on her some months ago; andshe’s getting on like a house on fire. I shall win my bet. She has aquick ear; and she’s been easier to teach than my middle-class pupilsbecause she’s had to learn a complete new language. She talks Englishalmost as you talk French.MRS. HIGGINS. That’s satisfactory, at all events.HIGGINS. Well, it is and it isn’t.MRS. HIGGINS. What does that mean?HIGGINS. You see, I’ve got her pronunciation all right; but you have toconsider not only how a girl pronounces, but what she pronounces; andthat’s where—They are interrupted by the parlor-maid, announcing guests.THE PARLOR-MAID. Mrs. and Miss Eynsford Hill. [She withdraws].HIGGINS. Oh Lord! [He rises; snatches his hat from the table; and makesfor the door; but before he reaches it his mother introduces him].Mrs. and Miss Eynsford Hill are the mother and daughter who shelteredfrom the rain in Covent Garden. The mother is well bred, quiet, and hasthe habitual anxiety of straitened means. The daughter has acquired agay air of being very much at home in society: the bravado of genteelpoverty.MRS. EYNSFORD HILL [to Mrs. Higgins] How do you do? [They shake hands].MISS EYNSFORD HILL. How d’you do? [She shakes].MRS. HIGGINS [introducing] My son Henry.MRS. EYNSFORD HILL. Your celebrated son! I have so longed to meet you,Professor Higgins.HIGGINS [glumly, making no movement in her direction] Delighted. [Hebacks against the piano and bows brusquely].Miss EYNSFORD HILL [going to him with confident familiarity] How do youdo?HIGGINS [staring at her] I’ve seen you before somewhere. I haven’t theghost of a notion where; but I’ve heard your voice. [Drearily] Itdoesn’t matter. You’d better sit down.MRS. HIGGINS. I’m sorry to say that my celebrated son has no manners.You mustn’t mind him.MISS EYNSFORD HILL [gaily] I don’t. [She sits in the Elizabethan chair].MRS. EYNSFORD HILL [a little bewildered] Not at all. [She sits on theottoman between her daughter and Mrs. Higgins, who has turned her chairaway from the writing-table].HIGGINS. Oh, have I been rude? I didn’t mean to be. [He goes to thecentral window, through which, with his back to the company, hecontemplates the river and the flowers in Battersea Park on theopposite bank as if they were a frozen dessert.]The parlor-maid returns, ushering in Pickering.THE PARLOR-MAID. Colonel Pickering [She withdraws].PICKERING. How do you do, Mrs. Higgins?MRS. HIGGINS. So glad you’ve come. Do you know Mrs. Eynsford Hill—MissEynsford Hill? [Exchange of bows. The Colonel brings the Chippendalechair a little forward between Mrs. Hill and Mrs. Higgins, and sitsdown].PICKERING. Has Henry told you what we’ve come for?HIGGINS [over his shoulder] We were interrupted: damn it!MRS. HIGGINS. Oh Henry, Henry, really!MRS. EYNSFORD HILL [half rising] Are we in the way?MRS. HIGGINS [rising and making her sit down again] No, no. Youcouldn’t have come more fortunately: we want you to meet a friend ofours.HIGGINS [turning hopefully] Yes, by George! We want two or threepeople. You’ll do as well as anybody else.The parlor-maid returns, ushering Freddy.THE PARLOR-MAID. Mr. Eynsford Hill.HIGGINS [almost audibly, past endurance] God of Heaven! another of them.FREDDY [shaking hands with Mrs. Higgins] Ahdedo?MRS. HIGGINS. Very good of you to come. [Introducing] Colonel Pickering.FREDDY [bowing] Ahdedo?MRS. HIGGINS. I don’t think you know my son, Professor Higgins.FREDDY [going to Higgins] Ahdedo?HIGGINS [looking at him much as if he were a pickpocket] I’ll take myoath I’ve met you before somewhere. Where was it?FREDDY. I don’t think so.HIGGINS [resignedly] It don’t matter, anyhow. Sit down. He shakesFreddy’s hand, and almost slings him on the ottoman with his face tothe windows; then comes round to the other side of it.HIGGINS. Well, here we are, anyhow! [He sits down on the ottoman nextMrs. Eynsford Hill, on her left.] And now, what the devil are we goingto talk about until Eliza comes?MRS. HIGGINS. Henry: you are the life and soul of the Royal Society’ssoirees; but really you’re rather trying on more commonplace occasions.HIGGINS. Am I? Very sorry. [Beaming suddenly] I suppose I am, you know.[Uproariously] Ha, ha!MISS EYNSFORD HILL [who considers Higgins quite eligible matrimonially]I sympathize. I haven’t any small talk. If people would only be frankand say what they really think!HIGGINS [relapsing into gloom] Lord forbid!MRS. EYNSFORD HILL [taking up her daughter’s cue] But why?HIGGINS. What they think they ought to think is bad enough, Lord knows;but what they really think would break up the whole show. Do yousuppose it would be really agreeable if I were to come out now withwhat I really think?MISS EYNSFORD HILL [gaily] Is it so very cynical?HIGGINS. Cynical! Who the dickens said it was cynical? I mean itwouldn’t be decent.MRS. EYNSFORD HILL [seriously] Oh! I’m sure you don’t mean that, Mr.Higgins.HIGGINS. You see, we’re all savages, more or less. We’re supposed to becivilized and cultured—to know all about poetry and philosophy and artand science, and so on; but how many of us know even the meanings ofthese names? [To Miss Hill] What do you know of poetry? [To Mrs. Hill]What do you know of science? [Indicating Freddy] What does he know ofart or science or anything else? What the devil do you imagine I knowof philosophy?MRS. HIGGINS [warningly] Or of manners, Henry?THE PARLOR-MAID [opening the door] Miss Doolittle. [She withdraws].HIGGINS [rising hastily and running to Mrs. Higgins] Here she is,mother. [He stands on tiptoe and makes signs over his mother’s head toEliza to indicate to her which lady is her hostess].Eliza, who is exquisitely dressed, produces an impression of suchremarkable distinction and beauty as she enters that they all rise,quite flustered. Guided by Higgins’s signals, she comes to Mrs. Higginswith studied grace.LIZA [speaking with pedantic correctness of pronunciation and greatbeauty of tone] How do you do, Mrs. Higgins? [She gasps slightly inmaking sure of the H in Higgins, but is quite successful]. Mr. Higginstold me I might come.MRS. HIGGINS [cordially] Quite right: I’m very glad indeed to see you.PICKERING. How do you do, Miss Doolittle?LIZA [shaking hands with him] Colonel Pickering, is it not?MRS. EYNSFORD HILL. I feel sure we have met before, Miss Doolittle. Iremember your eyes.LIZA. How do you do? [She sits down on the ottoman gracefully in theplace just left vacant by Higgins].MRS. EYNSFORD HILL [introducing] My daughter Clara.LIZA. How do you do?CLARA [impulsively] How do you do? [She sits down on the ottoman besideEliza, devouring her with her eyes].FREDDY [coming to their side of the ottoman] I’ve certainly had thepleasure.MRS. EYNSFORD HILL [introducing] My son Freddy.LIZA. How do you do?Freddy bows and sits down in the Elizabethan chair, infatuated.HIGGINS [suddenly] By George, yes: it all comes back to me! [They stareat him]. Covent Garden! [Lamentably] What a damned thing!MRS. HIGGINS. Henry, please! [He is about to sit on the edge of thetable]. Don’t sit on my writing-table: you’ll break it.HIGGINS [sulkily] Sorry.He goes to the divan, stumbling into the fender and over the fire-ironson his way; extricating himself with muttered imprecations; andfinishing his disastrous journey by throwing himself so impatiently onthe divan that he almost breaks it. Mrs. Higgins looks at him, butcontrols herself and says nothing.A long and painful pause ensues.MRS. HIGGINS [at last, conversationally] Will it rain, do you think?LIZA. The shallow depression in the west of these islands is likely tomove slowly in an easterly direction. There are no indications of anygreat change in the barometrical situation.FREDDY. Ha! ha! how awfully funny!LIZA. What is wrong with that, young man? I bet I got it right.FREDDY. Killing!MRS. EYNSFORD HILL. I’m sure I hope it won’t turn cold. There’s so muchinfluenza about. It runs right through our whole family regularly everyspring.LIZA [darkly] My aunt died of influenza: so they said.MRS. EYNSFORD HILL [clicks her tongue sympathetically]!!!LIZA [in the same tragic tone] But it’s my belief they done the oldwoman in.MRS. HIGGINS [puzzled] Done her in?LIZA. Y-e-e-e-es, Lord love you! Why should she die of influenza? Shecome through diphtheria right enough the year before. I saw her with myown eyes. Fairly blue with it, she was. They all thought she was dead;but my father he kept ladling gin down her throat til she came to sosudden that she bit the bowl off the spoon.MRS. EYNSFORD HILL [startled] Dear me!LIZA [piling up the indictment] What call would a woman with thatstrength in her have to die of influenza? What become of her new strawhat that should have come to me? Somebody pinched it; and what I sayis, them as pinched it done her in.MRS. EYNSFORD HILL. What does doing her in mean?HIGGINS [hastily] Oh, that’s the new small talk. To do a person inmeans to kill them.MRS. EYNSFORD HILL [to Eliza, horrified] You surely don’t believe thatyour aunt was killed?LIZA. Do I not! Them she lived with would have killed her for ahat-pin, let alone a hat.MRS. EYNSFORD HILL. But it can’t have been right for your father topour spirits down her throat like that. It might have killed her.LIZA. Not her. Gin was mother’s milk to her. Besides, he’d poured somuch down his own throat that he knew the good of it.MRS. EYNSFORD HILL. Do you mean that he drank?LIZA. Drank! My word! Something chronic.MRS. EYNSFORD HILL. How dreadful for you!LIZA. Not a bit. It never did him no harm what I could see. But then hedid not keep it up regular. [Cheerfully] On the burst, as you mightsay, from time to time. And always more agreeable when he had a dropin. When he was out of work, my mother used to give him fourpence andtell him to go out and not come back until he’d drunk himself cheerfuland loving-like. There’s lots of women has to make their husbands drunkto make them fit to live with. [Now quite at her ease] You see, it’slike this. If a man has a bit of a conscience, it always takes him whenhe’s sober; and then it makes him low-spirited. A drop of booze justtakes that off and makes him happy. [To Freddy, who is in convulsionsof suppressed laughter] Here! what are you sniggering at?FREDDY. The new small talk. You do it so awfully well.LIZA. If I was doing it proper, what was you laughing at? [To Higgins]Have I said anything I oughtn’t?MRS. HIGGINS [interposing] Not at all, Miss Doolittle.LIZA. Well, that’s a mercy, anyhow. [Expansively] What I always say is—HIGGINS [rising and looking at his watch] Ahem!LIZA [looking round at him; taking the hint; and rising] Well: I mustgo. [They all rise. Freddy goes to the door]. So pleased to have metyou. Good-bye. [She shakes hands with Mrs. Higgins].MRS. HIGGINS. Good-bye.LIZA. Good-bye, Colonel Pickering.PICKERING. Good-bye, Miss Doolittle. [They shake hands].LIZA [nodding to the others] Good-bye, all.FREDDY [opening the door for her] Are you walking across the Park, MissDoolittle? If so—LIZA. Walk! Not bloody likely. [Sensation]. I am going in a taxi. [Shegoes out].Pickering gasps and sits down. Freddy goes out on the balcony to catchanother glimpse of Eliza.MRS. EYNSFORD HILL [suffering from shock] Well, I really can’t get usedto the new ways.CLARA [throwing herself discontentedly into the Elizabethan chair]. Oh,it’s all right, mamma, quite right. People will think we never goanywhere or see anybody if you are so old-fashioned.MRS. EYNSFORD HILL. I daresay I am very old-fashioned; but I do hopeyou won’t begin using that expression, Clara. I have got accustomed tohear you talking about men as rotters, and calling everything filthyand beastly; though I do think it horrible and unladylike. But thislast is really too much. Don’t you think so, Colonel Pickering?PICKERING. Don’t ask me. I’ve been away in India for several years; andmanners have changed so much that I sometimes don’t know whether I’m ata respectable dinner-table or in a ship’s forecastle.CLARA. It’s all a matter of habit. There’s no right or wrong in it.Nobody means anything by it. And it’s so quaint, and gives such a smartemphasis to things that are not in themselves very witty. I find thenew small talk delightful and quite innocent.MRS. EYNSFORD HILL [rising] Well, after that, I think it’s time for usto go.Pickering and Higgins rise.CLARA [rising] Oh yes: we have three at homes to go to still. Good-bye,Mrs. Higgins. Good-bye, Colonel Pickering. Good-bye, Professor Higgins.HIGGINS [coming grimly at her from the divan, and accompanying her tothe door] Good-bye. Be sure you try on that small talk at the threeat-homes. Don’t be nervous about it. Pitch it in strong.CLARA [all smiles] I will. Good-bye. Such nonsense, all this earlyVictorian prudery!HIGGINS [tempting her] Such damned nonsense!CLARA. Such bloody nonsense!MRS. EYNSFORD HILL [convulsively] Clara!CLARA. Ha! ha! [She goes out radiant, conscious of being thoroughly upto date, and is heard descending the stairs in a stream of silverylaughter].FREDDY [to the heavens at large] Well, I ask you [He gives it up, andcomes to Mrs. Higgins]. Good-bye.MRS. HIGGINS [shaking hands] Good-bye. Would you like to meet MissDoolittle again?FREDDY [eagerly] Yes, I should, most awfully.MRS. HIGGINS. Well, you know my days.FREDDY. Yes. Thanks awfully. Good-bye. [He goes out].MRS. EYNSFORD HILL. Good-bye, Mr. Higgins.HIGGINS. Good-bye. Good-bye.MRS. EYNSFORD HILL [to Pickering] It’s no use. I shall never be able tobring myself to use that word.PICKERING. Don’t. It’s not compulsory, you know. You’ll get on quitewell without it.MRS. EYNSFORD HILL. Only, Clara is so down on me if I am not positivelyreeking with the latest slang. Good-bye.PICKERING. Good-bye [They shake hands].MRS. EYNSFORD HILL [to Mrs. Higgins] You mustn’t mind Clara.[Pickering, catching from her lowered tone that this is not meant forhim to hear, discreetly joins Higgins at the window]. We’re so poor!and she gets so few parties, poor child! She doesn’t quite know. [Mrs.Higgins, seeing that her eyes are moist, takes her hand sympatheticallyand goes with her to the door]. But the boy is nice. Don’t you think so?MRS. HIGGINS. Oh, quite nice. I shall always be delighted to see him.MRS. EYNSFORD HILL. Thank you, dear. Good-bye. [She goes out].HIGGINS [eagerly] Well? Is Eliza presentable [he swoops on his motherand drags her to the ottoman, where she sits down in Eliza’s place withher son on her left]?Pickering returns to his chair on her right.MRS. HIGGINS. You silly boy, of course she’s not presentable. She’s atriumph of your art and of her dressmaker’s; but if you suppose for amoment that she doesn’t give herself away in every sentence she utters,you must be perfectly cracked about her.PICKERING. But don’t you think something might be done? I meansomething to eliminate the sanguinary element from her conversation.MRS. HIGGINS. Not as long as she is in Henry’s hands.HIGGINS [aggrieved] Do you mean that my language is improper?MRS. HIGGINS. No, dearest: it would be quite proper—say on a canalbarge; but it would not be proper for her at a garden party.HIGGINS [deeply injured] Well I must say—PICKERING [interrupting him] Come, Higgins: you must learn to knowyourself. I haven’t heard such language as yours since we used toreview the volunteers in Hyde Park twenty years ago.HIGGINS [sulkily] Oh, well, if you say so, I suppose I don’t alwaystalk like a bishop.MRS. HIGGINS [quieting Henry with a touch] Colonel Pickering: will youtell me what is the exact state of things in Wimpole Street?PICKERING [cheerfully: as if this completely changed the subject] Well,I have come to live there with Henry. We work together at my IndianDialects; and we think it more convenient—MRS. HIGGINS. Quite so. I know all about that: it’s an excellentarrangement. But where does this girl live?HIGGINS. With us, of course. Where would she live?MRS. HIGGINS. But on what terms? Is she a servant? If not, what is she?PICKERING [slowly] I think I know what you mean, Mrs. Higgins.HIGGINS. Well, dash me if I do! I’ve had to work at the girl every dayfor months to get her to her present pitch. Besides, she’s useful. Sheknows where my things are, and remembers my appointments and so forth.MRS. HIGGINS. How does your housekeeper get on with her?HIGGINS. Mrs. Pearce? Oh, she’s jolly glad to get so much taken off herhands; for before Eliza came, she had to have to find things and remindme of my appointments. But she’s got some silly bee in her bonnet aboutEliza. She keeps saying “You don’t think, sir”: doesn’t she, Pick?PICKERING. Yes: that’s the formula. “You don’t think, sir.” That’s theend of every conversation about Eliza.HIGGINS. As if I ever stop thinking about the girl and her confoundedvowels and consonants. I’m worn out, thinking about her, and watchingher lips and her teeth and her tongue, not to mention her soul, whichis the quaintest of the lot.MRS. HIGGINS. You certainly are a pretty pair of babies, playing withyour live doll.HIGGINS. Playing! The hardest job I ever tackled: make no mistake aboutthat, mother. But you have no idea how frightfully interesting it is totake a human being and change her into a quite different human being bycreating a new speech for her. It’s filling up the deepest gulf thatseparates class from class and soul from soul.PICKERING [drawing his chair closer to Mrs. Higgins and bending over toher eagerly] Yes: it’s enormously interesting. I assure you, Mrs.Higgins, we take Eliza very seriously. Every week—every dayalmost—there is some new change. [Closer again] We keep records ofevery stage—dozens of gramophone disks and photographs—HIGGINS [assailing her at the other ear] Yes, by George: it’s the mostabsorbing experiment I ever tackled. She regularly fills our lives up;doesn’t she, Pick?PICKERING. We’re always talking Eliza.HIGGINS. Teaching Eliza.PICKERING. Dressing Eliza.MRS. HIGGINS. What!HIGGINS. Inventing new Elizas.Higgins and Pickering, speaking together:  HIGGINS.    You know, she has the most extraordinary quickness of ear:  PICKERING.  I assure you, my dear Mrs. Higgins, that girl  HIGGINS.    just like a parrot. I’ve tried her with every  PICKERING.  is a genius. She can play the piano quite beautifully  HIGGINS.    possible sort of sound that a human being can make—  PICKERING.  We have taken her to classical concerts and to music  HIGGINS.    Continental dialects, African dialects, Hottentot  PICKERING.  halls; and it’s all the same to her: she plays everything  HIGGINS.    clicks, things it took me years to get hold of; and  PICKERING.  she hears right off when she comes home, whether it’s  HIGGINS.    she picks them up like a shot, right away, as if she had  PICKERING.  Beethoven and Brahms or Lehar and Lionel Morickton;  HIGGINS.    been at it all her life.  PICKERING.  though six months ago, she’d never as much as touched              a piano.MRS. HIGGINS [putting her fingers in her ears, as they are by this timeshouting one another down with an intolerable noise] Sh—sh—sh—sh![They stop].PICKERING. I beg your pardon. [He draws his chair back apologetically].HIGGINS. Sorry. When Pickering starts shouting nobody can get a word inedgeways.MRS. HIGGINS. Be quiet, Henry. Colonel Pickering: don’t you realizethat when Eliza walked into Wimpole Street, something walked in withher?PICKERING. Her father did. But Henry soon got rid of him.MRS. HIGGINS. It would have been more to the point if her mother had.But as her mother didn’t something else did.PICKERING. But what?MRS. HIGGINS [unconsciously dating herself by the word] A problem.PICKERING. Oh, I see. The problem of how to pass her off as a lady.HIGGINS. I’ll solve that problem. I’ve half solved it already.MRS. HIGGINS. No, you two infinitely stupid male creatures: the problemof what is to be done with her afterwards.HIGGINS. I don’t see anything in that. She can go her own way, with allthe advantages I have given her.MRS. HIGGINS. The advantages of that poor woman who was here just now!The manners and habits that disqualify a fine lady from earning her ownliving without giving her a fine lady’s income! Is that what you mean?PICKERING [indulgently, being rather bored] Oh, that will be all right,Mrs. Higgins. [He rises to go].HIGGINS [rising also] We’ll find her some light employment.PICKERING. She’s happy enough. Don’t you worry about her. Good-bye. [Heshakes hands as if he were consoling a frightened child, and makes forthe door].HIGGINS. Anyhow, there’s no good bothering now. The thing’s done.Good-bye, mother. [He kisses her, and follows Pickering].PICKERING [turning for a final consolation] There are plenty ofopenings. We’ll do what’s right. Good-bye.HIGGINS [to Pickering as they go out together] Let’s take her to theShakespear exhibition at Earls Court.PICKERING. Yes: let’s. Her remarks will be delicious.HIGGINS. She’ll mimic all the people for us when we get home.PICKERING. Ripping. [Both are heard laughing as they go downstairs].MRS. HIGGINS [rises with an impatient bounce, and returns to her workat the writing-table. She sweeps a litter of disarranged papers out ofher way; snatches a sheet of paper from her stationery case; and triesresolutely to write. At the third line she gives it up; flings down herpen; grips the table angrily and exclaims] Oh, men! men!! men!!!ACT IVThe Wimpole Street laboratory. Midnight. Nobody in the room. The clockon the mantelpiece strikes twelve. The fire is not alight: it is asummer night.Presently Higgins and Pickering are heard on the stairs.HIGGINS [calling down to Pickering] I say, Pick: lock up, will you. Ishan’t be going out again.PICKERING. Right. Can Mrs. Pearce go to bed? We don’t want anythingmore, do we?HIGGINS. Lord, no!Eliza opens the door and is seen on the lighted landing in opera cloak,brilliant evening dress, and diamonds, with fan, flowers, and allaccessories. She comes to the hearth, and switches on the electriclights there. She is tired: her pallor contrasts strongly with her darkeyes and hair; and her expression is almost tragic. She takes off hercloak; puts her fan and flowers on the piano; and sits down on thebench, brooding and silent. Higgins, in evening dress, with overcoatand hat, comes in, carrying a smoking jacket which he has picked updownstairs. He takes off the hat and overcoat; throws them carelesslyon the newspaper stand; disposes of his coat in the same way; puts onthe smoking jacket; and throws himself wearily into the easy-chair atthe hearth. Pickering, similarly attired, comes in. He also takes offhis hat and overcoat, and is about to throw them on Higgins’s when hehesitates.PICKERING. I say: Mrs. Pearce will row if we leave these things lyingabout in the drawing-room.HIGGINS. Oh, chuck them over the bannisters into the hall. She’ll findthem there in the morning and put them away all right. She’ll think wewere drunk.PICKERING. We are, slightly. Are there any letters?HIGGINS. I didn’t look. [Pickering takes the overcoats and hats andgoes down stairs. Higgins begins half singing half yawning an air fromLa Fanciulla del Golden West. Suddenly he stops and exclaims] I wonderwhere the devil my slippers are!Eliza looks at him darkly; then leaves the room.Higgins yawns again, and resumes his song. Pickering returns, with thecontents of the letter-box in his hand.PICKERING. Only circulars, and this coroneted billet-doux for you. [Hethrows the circulars into the fender, and posts himself on thehearthrug, with his back to the grate].HIGGINS [glancing at the billet-doux] Money-lender. [He throws theletter after the circulars].Eliza returns with a pair of large down-at-heel slippers. She placesthem on the carpet before Higgins, and sits as before without a word.HIGGINS [yawning again] Oh Lord! What an evening! What a crew! What asilly tomfoollery! [He raises his shoe to unlace it, and catches sightof the slippers. He stops unlacing and looks at them as if they hadappeared there of their own accord]. Oh! they’re there, are they?PICKERING [stretching himself] Well, I feel a bit tired. It’s been along day. The garden party, a dinner party, and the opera! Rather toomuch of a good thing. But you’ve won your bet, Higgins. Eliza did thetrick, and something to spare, eh?HIGGINS [fervently] Thank God it’s over!Eliza flinches violently; but they take no notice of her; and sherecovers herself and sits stonily as before.PICKERING. Were you nervous at the garden party? I was. Eliza didn’tseem a bit nervous.HIGGINS. Oh, she wasn’t nervous. I knew she’d be all right. No, it’sthe strain of putting the job through all these months that has told onme. It was interesting enough at first, while we were at the phonetics;but after that I got deadly sick of it. If I hadn’t backed myself to doit I should have chucked the whole thing up two months ago. It was asilly notion: the whole thing has been a bore.PICKERING. Oh come! the garden party was frightfully exciting. My heartbegan beating like anything.HIGGINS. Yes, for the first three minutes. But when I saw we were goingto win hands down, I felt like a bear in a cage, hanging about doingnothing. The dinner was worse: sitting gorging there for over an hour,with nobody but a damned fool of a fashionable woman to talk to! I tellyou, Pickering, never again for me. No more artificial duchesses. Thewhole thing has been simple purgatory.PICKERING. You’ve never been broken in properly to the social routine.[Strolling over to the piano] I rather enjoy dipping into itoccasionally myself: it makes me feel young again. Anyhow, it was agreat success: an immense success. I was quite frightened once or twicebecause Eliza was doing it so well. You see, lots of the real peoplecan’t do it at all: they’re such fools that they think style comes bynature to people in their position; and so they never learn. There’salways something professional about doing a thing superlatively well.HIGGINS. Yes: that’s what drives me mad: the silly people don’t knowtheir own silly business. [Rising] However, it’s over and done with;and now I can go to bed at last without dreading tomorrow.Eliza’s beauty becomes murderous.PICKERING. I think I shall turn in too. Still, it’s been a greatoccasion: a triumph for you. Good-night. [He goes].HIGGINS [following him] Good-night. [Over his shoulder, at the door]Put out the lights, Eliza; and tell Mrs. Pearce not to make coffee forme in the morning: I’ll take tea. [He goes out].Eliza tries to control herself and feel indifferent as she rises andwalks across to the hearth to switch off the lights. By the time shegets there she is on the point of screaming. She sits down in Higgins’schair and holds on hard to the arms. Finally she gives way and flingsherself furiously on the floor raging.HIGGINS [in despairing wrath outside] What the devil have I done withmy slippers? [He appears at the door].LIZA [snatching up the slippers, and hurling them at him one after theother with all her force] There are your slippers. And there. Take yourslippers; and may you never have a day’s luck with them!HIGGINS [astounded] What on earth—! [He comes to her]. What’s thematter? Get up. [He pulls her up]. Anything wrong?LIZA [breathless] Nothing wrong—with YOU. I’ve won your bet for you,haven’t I? That’s enough for you. _I_ don’t matter, I suppose.HIGGINS. YOU won my bet! You! Presumptuous insect! _I_ won it. What didyou throw those slippers at me for?LIZA. Because I wanted to smash your face. I’d like to kill you, youselfish brute. Why didn’t you leave me where you picked me out of—inthe gutter? You thank God it’s all over, and that now you can throw meback again there, do you? [She crisps her fingers, frantically].HIGGINS [looking at her in cool wonder] The creature IS nervous, afterall.LIZA [gives a suffocated scream of fury, and instinctively darts hernails at his face]!!HIGGINS [catching her wrists] Ah! would you? Claws in, you cat. Howdare you show your temper to me? Sit down and be quiet. [He throws herroughly into the easy-chair].LIZA [crushed by superior strength and weight] What’s to become of me?What’s to become of me?HIGGINS. How the devil do I know what’s to become of you? What does itmatter what becomes of you?LIZA. You don’t care. I know you don’t care. You wouldn’t care if I wasdead. I’m nothing to you—not so much as them slippers.HIGGINS [thundering] THOSE slippers.LIZA [with bitter submission] Those slippers. I didn’t think it madeany difference now.A pause. Eliza hopeless and crushed. Higgins a little uneasy.HIGGINS [in his loftiest manner] Why have you begun going on like this?May I ask whether you complain of your treatment here?LIZA. No.HIGGINS. Has anybody behaved badly to you? Colonel Pickering? Mrs.Pearce? Any of the servants?LIZA. No.HIGGINS. I presume you don’t pretend that I have treated you badly.LIZA. No.HIGGINS. I am glad to hear it. [He moderates his tone]. Perhaps you’retired after the strain of the day. Will you have a glass of champagne?[He moves towards the door].LIZA. No. [Recollecting her manners] Thank you.HIGGINS [good-humored again] This has been coming on you for some days.I suppose it was natural for you to be anxious about the garden party.But that’s all over now. [He pats her kindly on the shoulder. Shewrithes]. There’s nothing more to worry about.LIZA. No. Nothing more for you to worry about. [She suddenly rises andgets away from him by going to the piano bench, where she sits andhides her face]. Oh God! I wish I was dead.HIGGINS [staring after her in sincere surprise] Why? in heaven’s name,why? [Reasonably, going to her] Listen to me, Eliza. All thisirritation is purely subjective.LIZA. I don’t understand. I’m too ignorant.HIGGINS. It’s only imagination. Low spirits and nothing else. Nobody’shurting you. Nothing’s wrong. You go to bed like a good girl and sleepit off. Have a little cry and say your prayers: that will make youcomfortable.LIZA. I heard YOUR prayers. “Thank God it’s all over!”HIGGINS [impatiently] Well, don’t you thank God it’s all over? Now youare free and can do what you like.LIZA [pulling herself together in desperation] What am I fit for? Whathave you left me fit for? Where am I to go? What am I to do? What’s tobecome of me?HIGGINS [enlightened, but not at all impressed] Oh, that’s what’sworrying you, is it? [He thrusts his hands into his pockets, and walksabout in his usual manner, rattling the contents of his pockets, as ifcondescending to a trivial subject out of pure kindness]. I shouldn’tbother about it if I were you. I should imagine you won’t have muchdifficulty in settling yourself, somewhere or other, though I hadn’tquite realized that you were going away. [She looks quickly at him: hedoes not look at her, but examines the dessert stand on the piano anddecides that he will eat an apple]. You might marry, you know. [Hebites a large piece out of the apple, and munches it noisily]. You see,Eliza, all men are not confirmed old bachelors like me and the Colonel.Most men are the marrying sort (poor devils!); and you’re notbad-looking; it’s quite a pleasure to look at you sometimes—not now,of course, because you’re crying and looking as ugly as the very devil;but when you’re all right and quite yourself, you’re what I should callattractive. That is, to the people in the marrying line, youunderstand. You go to bed and have a good nice rest; and then get upand look at yourself in the glass; and you won’t feel so cheap.Eliza again looks at him, speechless, and does not stir.The look is quite lost on him: he eats his apple with a dreamyexpression of happiness, as it is quite a good one.HIGGINS [a genial afterthought occurring to him] I daresay my mothercould find some chap or other who would do very well—LIZA. We were above that at the corner of Tottenham Court Road.HIGGINS [waking up] What do you mean?LIZA. I sold flowers. I didn’t sell myself. Now you’ve made a lady ofme I’m not fit to sell anything else. I wish you’d left me where youfound me.HIGGINS [slinging the core of the apple decisively into the grate]Tosh, Eliza. Don’t you insult human relations by dragging all this cantabout buying and selling into it. You needn’t marry the fellow if youdon’t like him.LIZA. What else am I to do?HIGGINS. Oh, lots of things. What about your old idea of a florist’sshop? Pickering could set you up in one: he’s lots of money.[Chuckling] He’ll have to pay for all those togs you have been wearingtoday; and that, with the hire of the jewellery, will make a big holein two hundred pounds. Why, six months ago you would have thought itthe millennium to have a flower shop of your own. Come! you’ll be allright. I must clear off to bed: I’m devilish sleepy. By the way, I camedown for something: I forget what it was.LIZA. Your slippers.HIGGINS. Oh yes, of course. You shied them at me. [He picks them up,and is going out when she rises and speaks to him].LIZA. Before you go, sir—HIGGINS [dropping the slippers in his surprise at her calling him sir]Eh?LIZA. Do my clothes belong to me or to Colonel Pickering?HIGGINS [coming back into the room as if her question were the veryclimax of unreason] What the devil use would they be to Pickering?LIZA. He might want them for the next girl you pick up to experiment on.HIGGINS [shocked and hurt] Is THAT the way you feel towards us?LIZA. I don’t want to hear anything more about that. All I want to knowis whether anything belongs to me. My own clothes were burnt.HIGGINS. But what does it matter? Why need you start bothering aboutthat in the middle of the night?LIZA. I want to know what I may take away with me. I don’t want to beaccused of stealing.HIGGINS [now deeply wounded] Stealing! You shouldn’t have said that,Eliza. That shows a want of feeling.LIZA. I’m sorry. I’m only a common ignorant girl; and in my station Ihave to be careful. There can’t be any feelings between the like of youand the like of me. Please will you tell me what belongs to me and whatdoesn’t?HIGGINS [very sulky] You may take the whole damned houseful if youlike. Except the jewels. They’re hired. Will that satisfy you? [Heturns on his heel and is about to go in extreme dudgeon].LIZA [drinking in his emotion like nectar, and nagging him to provoke afurther supply] Stop, please. [She takes off her jewels]. Will you takethese to your room and keep them safe? I don’t want to run the risk oftheir being missing.HIGGINS [furious] Hand them over. [She puts them into his hands]. Ifthese belonged to me instead of to the jeweler, I’d ram them down yourungrateful throat. [He perfunctorily thrusts them into his pockets,unconsciously decorating himself with the protruding ends of thechains].LIZA [taking a ring off] This ring isn’t the jeweler’s: it’s the oneyou bought me in Brighton. I don’t want it now. [Higgins dashes thering violently into the fireplace, and turns on her so threateninglythat she crouches over the piano with her hands over her face, andexclaims] Don’t you hit me.HIGGINS. Hit you! You infamous creature, how dare you accuse me of sucha thing? It is you who have hit me. You have wounded me to the heart.LIZA [thrilling with hidden joy] I’m glad. I’ve got a little of my ownback, anyhow.HIGGINS [with dignity, in his finest professional style] You havecaused me to lose my temper: a thing that has hardly ever happened tome before. I prefer to say nothing more tonight. I am going to bed.LIZA [pertly] You’d better leave a note for Mrs. Pearce about thecoffee; for she won’t be told by me.HIGGINS [formally] Damn Mrs. Pearce; and damn the coffee; and damn you;and damn my own folly in having lavished MY hard-earned knowledge andthe treasure of my regard and intimacy on a heartless guttersnipe. [Hegoes out with impressive decorum, and spoils it by slamming the doorsavagely].Eliza smiles for the first time; expresses her feelings by a wildpantomime in which an imitation of Higgins’s exit is confused with herown triumph; and finally goes down on her knees on the hearthrug tolook for the ring.ACT VMrs. Higgins’s drawing-room. She is at her writing-table as before. Theparlor-maid comes in.THE PARLOR-MAID [at the door] Mr. Henry, mam, is downstairs withColonel Pickering.MRS. HIGGINS. Well, show them up.THE PARLOR-MAID. They’re using the telephone, mam. Telephoning to thepolice, I think.MRS. HIGGINS. What!THE PARLOR-MAID [coming further in and lowering her voice] Mr. Henry’sin a state, mam. I thought I’d better tell you.MRS. HIGGINS. If you had told me that Mr. Henry was not in a state itwould have been more surprising. Tell them to come up when they’vefinished with the police. I suppose he’s lost something.THE PARLOR-MAID. Yes, maam [going].MRS. HIGGINS. Go upstairs and tell Miss Doolittle that Mr. Henry andthe Colonel are here. Ask her not to come down till I send for her.THE PARLOR-MAID. Yes, mam.Higgins bursts in. He is, as the parlor-maid has said, in a state.HIGGINS. Look here, mother: here’s a confounded thing!MRS. HIGGINS. Yes, dear. Good-morning. [He checks his impatience andkisses her, whilst the parlor-maid goes out]. What is it?HIGGINS. Eliza’s bolted.MRS. HIGGINS [calmly continuing her writing] You must have frightenedher.HIGGINS. Frightened her! nonsense! She was left last night, as usual,to turn out the lights and all that; and instead of going to bed shechanged her clothes and went right off: her bed wasn’t slept in. Shecame in a cab for her things before seven this morning; and that foolMrs. Pearce let her have them without telling me a word about it. Whatam I to do?MRS. HIGGINS. Do without, I’m afraid, Henry. The girl has a perfectright to leave if she chooses.HIGGINS [wandering distractedly across the room] But I can’t findanything. I don’t know what appointments I’ve got. I’m— [Pickeringcomes in. Mrs. Higgins puts down her pen and turns away from thewriting-table].PICKERING [shaking hands] Good-morning, Mrs. Higgins. Has Henry toldyou? [He sits down on the ottoman].HIGGINS. What does that ass of an inspector say? Have you offered areward?MRS. HIGGINS [rising in indignant amazement] You don’t mean to say youhave set the police after Eliza?HIGGINS. Of course. What are the police for? What else could we do? [Hesits in the Elizabethan chair].PICKERING. The inspector made a lot of difficulties. I really think hesuspected us of some improper purpose.MRS. HIGGINS. Well, of course he did. What right have you to go to thepolice and give the girl’s name as if she were a thief, or a lostumbrella, or something? Really! [She sits down again, deeply vexed].HIGGINS. But we want to find her.PICKERING. We can’t let her go like this, you know, Mrs. Higgins. Whatwere we to do?MRS. HIGGINS. You have no more sense, either of you, than two children.Why—The parlor-maid comes in and breaks off the conversation.THE PARLOR-MAID. Mr. Henry: a gentleman wants to see you veryparticular. He’s been sent on from Wimpole Street.HIGGINS. Oh, bother! I can’t see anyone now. Who is it?THE PARLOR-MAID. A Mr. Doolittle, Sir.PICKERING. Doolittle! Do you mean the dustman?THE PARLOR-MAID. Dustman! Oh no, sir: a gentleman.HIGGINS [springing up excitedly] By George, Pick, it’s some relative ofhers that she’s gone to. Somebody we know nothing about. [To theparlor-maid] Send him up, quick.THE PARLOR-MAID. Yes, Sir. [She goes].HIGGINS [eagerly, going to his mother] Genteel relatives! now we shallhear something. [He sits down in the Chippendale chair].MRS. HIGGINS. Do you know any of her people?PICKERING. Only her father: the fellow we told you about.THE PARLOR-MAID [announcing] Mr. Doolittle. [She withdraws].Doolittle enters. He is brilliantly dressed in a new fashionablefrock-coat, with white waistcoat and grey trousers. A flower in hisbuttonhole, a dazzling silk hat, and patent leather shoes complete theeffect. He is too concerned with the business he has come on to noticeMrs. Higgins. He walks straight to Higgins, and accosts him withvehement reproach.DOOLITTLE [indicating his own person] See here! Do you see this? Youdone this.HIGGINS. Done what, man?DOOLITTLE. This, I tell you. Look at it. Look at this hat. Look at thiscoat.PICKERING. Has Eliza been buying you clothes?DOOLITTLE. Eliza! not she. Not half. Why would she buy me clothes?MRS. HIGGINS. Good-morning, Mr. Doolittle. Won’t you sit down?DOOLITTLE [taken aback as he becomes conscious that he has forgottenhis hostess] Asking your pardon, ma’am. [He approaches her and shakesher proffered hand]. Thank you. [He sits down on the ottoman, onPickering’s right]. I am that full of what has happened to me that Ican’t think of anything else.HIGGINS. What the dickens has happened to you?DOOLITTLE. I shouldn’t mind if it had only happened to me: anythingmight happen to anybody and nobody to blame but Providence, as youmight say. But this is something that you done to me: yes, you, HenryHiggins.HIGGINS. Have you found Eliza? That’s the point.DOOLITTLE. Have you lost her?HIGGINS. Yes.DOOLITTLE. You have all the luck, you have. I ain’t found her; butshe’ll find me quick enough now after what you done to me.MRS. HIGGINS. But what has my son done to you, Mr. Doolittle?DOOLITTLE. Done to me! Ruined me. Destroyed my happiness. Tied me upand delivered me into the hands of middle class morality.HIGGINS [rising intolerantly and standing over Doolittle] You’reraving. You’re drunk. You’re mad. I gave you five pounds. After that Ihad two conversations with you, at half-a-crown an hour. I’ve neverseen you since.DOOLITTLE. Oh! Drunk! am I? Mad! am I? Tell me this. Did you or did younot write a letter to an old blighter in America that was giving fivemillions to found Moral Reform Societies all over the world, and thatwanted you to invent a universal language for him?HIGGINS. What! Ezra D. Wannafeller! He’s dead. [He sits down againcarelessly].DOOLITTLE. Yes: he’s dead; and I’m done for. Now did you or did you notwrite a letter to him to say that the most original moralist at presentin England, to the best of your knowledge, was Alfred Doolittle, acommon dustman.HIGGINS. Oh, after your last visit I remember making some silly joke ofthe kind.DOOLITTLE. Ah! you may well call it a silly joke. It put the lid on meright enough. Just give him the chance he wanted to show that Americansis not like us: that they recognize and respect merit in every class oflife, however humble. Them words is in his blooming will, in which,Henry Higgins, thanks to your silly joking, he leaves me a share in hisPre-digested Cheese Trust worth three thousand a year on condition thatI lecture for his Wannafeller Moral Reform World League as often asthey ask me up to six times a year.HIGGINS. The devil he does! Whew! [Brightening suddenly] What a lark!PICKERING. A safe thing for you, Doolittle. They won’t ask you twice.DOOLITTLE. It ain’t the lecturing I mind. I’ll lecture them blue in theface, I will, and not turn a hair. It’s making a gentleman of me that Iobject to. Who asked him to make a gentleman of me? I was happy. I wasfree. I touched pretty nigh everybody for money when I wanted it, sameas I touched you, Henry Higgins. Now I am worrited; tied neck andheels; and everybody touches me for money. It’s a fine thing for you,says my solicitor. Is it? says I. You mean it’s a good thing for you, Isays. When I was a poor man and had a solicitor once when they found apram in the dust cart, he got me off, and got shut of me and got meshut of him as quick as he could. Same with the doctors: used to shoveme out of the hospital before I could hardly stand on my legs, andnothing to pay. Now they finds out that I’m not a healthy man and can’tlive unless they looks after me twice a day. In the house I’m not letdo a hand’s turn for myself: somebody else must do it and touch me forit. A year ago I hadn’t a relative in the world except two or threethat wouldn’t speak to me. Now I’ve fifty, and not a decent week’swages among the lot of them. I have to live for others and not formyself: that’s middle class morality. You talk of losing Eliza. Don’tyou be anxious: I bet she’s on my doorstep by this: she that couldsupport herself easy by selling flowers if I wasn’t respectable. Andthe next one to touch me will be you, Henry Higgins. I’ll have to learnto speak middle class language from you, instead of speaking properEnglish. That’s where you’ll come in; and I daresay that’s what youdone it for.MRS. HIGGINS. But, my dear Mr. Doolittle, you need not suffer all thisif you are really in earnest. Nobody can force you to accept thisbequest. You can repudiate it. Isn’t that so, Colonel Pickering?PICKERING. I believe so.DOOLITTLE [softening his manner in deference to her sex] That’s thetragedy of it, ma’am. It’s easy to say chuck it; but I haven’t thenerve. Which one of us has? We’re all intimidated. Intimidated, ma’am:that’s what we are. What is there for me if I chuck it but theworkhouse in my old age? I have to dye my hair already to keep my jobas a dustman. If I was one of the deserving poor, and had put by a bit,I could chuck it; but then why should I, acause the deserving poormight as well be millionaires for all the happiness they ever has. Theydon’t know what happiness is. But I, as one of the undeserving poor,have nothing between me and the pauper’s uniform but this here blastedthree thousand a year that shoves me into the middle class. (Excuse theexpression, ma’am: you’d use it yourself if you had my provocation).They’ve got you every way you turn: it’s a choice between the Skilly ofthe workhouse and the Char Bydis of the middle class; and I haven’t thenerve for the workhouse. Intimidated: that’s what I am. Broke. Boughtup. Happier men than me will call for my dust, and touch me for theirtip; and I’ll look on helpless, and envy them. And that’s what your sonhas brought me to. [He is overcome by emotion].MRS. HIGGINS. Well, I’m very glad you’re not going to do anythingfoolish, Mr. Doolittle. For this solves the problem of Eliza’s future.You can provide for her now.DOOLITTLE [with melancholy resignation] Yes, ma’am; I’m expected toprovide for everyone now, out of three thousand a year.HIGGINS [jumping up] Nonsense! he can’t provide for her. He shan’tprovide for her. She doesn’t belong to him. I paid him five pounds forher. Doolittle: either you’re an honest man or a rogue.DOOLITTLE [tolerantly] A little of both, Henry, like the rest of us: alittle of both.HIGGINS. Well, you took that money for the girl; and you have no rightto take her as well.MRS. HIGGINS. Henry: don’t be absurd. If you really want to know whereEliza is, she is upstairs.HIGGINS [amazed] Upstairs!!! Then I shall jolly soon fetch herdownstairs. [He makes resolutely for the door].MRS. HIGGINS [rising and following him] Be quiet, Henry. Sit down.HIGGINS. I—MRS. HIGGINS. Sit down, dear; and listen to me.HIGGINS. Oh very well, very well, very well. [He throws himselfungraciously on the ottoman, with his face towards the windows]. But Ithink you might have told me this half an hour ago.MRS. HIGGINS. Eliza came to me this morning. She passed the nightpartly walking about in a rage, partly trying to throw herself into theriver and being afraid to, and partly in the Carlton Hotel. She told meof the brutal way you two treated her.HIGGINS [bounding up again] What!PICKERING [rising also] My dear Mrs. Higgins, she’s been telling youstories. We didn’t treat her brutally. We hardly said a word to her;and we parted on particularly good terms. [Turning on Higgins].Higgins: did you bully her after I went to bed?HIGGINS. Just the other way about. She threw my slippers in my face.She behaved in the most outrageous way. I never gave her the slightestprovocation. The slippers came bang into my face the moment I enteredthe room—before I had uttered a word. And used perfectly awfullanguage.PICKERING [astonished] But why? What did we do to her?MRS. HIGGINS. I think I know pretty well what you did. The girl isnaturally rather affectionate, I think. Isn’t she, Mr. Doolittle?DOOLITTLE. Very tender-hearted, ma’am. Takes after me.MRS. HIGGINS. Just so. She had become attached to you both. She workedvery hard for you, Henry! I don’t think you quite realize what anythingin the nature of brain work means to a girl like that. Well, it seemsthat when the great day of trial came, and she did this wonderful thingfor you without making a single mistake, you two sat there and neversaid a word to her, but talked together of how glad you were that itwas all over and how you had been bored with the whole thing. And thenyou were surprised because she threw your slippers at you! _I_ shouldhave thrown the fire-irons at you.HIGGINS. We said nothing except that we were tired and wanted to go tobed. Did we, Pick?PICKERING [shrugging his shoulders] That was all.MRS. HIGGINS [ironically] Quite sure?PICKERING. Absolutely. Really, that was all.MRS. HIGGINS. You didn’t thank her, or pet her, or admire her, or tellher how splendid she’d been.HIGGINS [impatiently] But she knew all about that. We didn’t makespeeches to her, if that’s what you mean.PICKERING [conscience stricken] Perhaps we were a little inconsiderate.Is she very angry?MRS. HIGGINS [returning to her place at the writing-table] Well, I’mafraid she won’t go back to Wimpole Street, especially now that Mr.Doolittle is able to keep up the position you have thrust on her; butshe says she is quite willing to meet you on friendly terms and to letbygones be bygones.HIGGINS [furious] Is she, by George? Ho!MRS. HIGGINS. If you promise to behave yourself, Henry, I’ll ask her tocome down. If not, go home; for you have taken up quite enough of mytime.HIGGINS. Oh, all right. Very well. Pick: you behave yourself. Let usput on our best Sunday manners for this creature that we picked out ofthe mud. [He flings himself sulkily into the Elizabethan chair].DOOLITTLE [remonstrating] Now, now, Henry Higgins! have someconsideration for my feelings as a middle class man.MRS. HIGGINS. Remember your promise, Henry. [She presses thebell-button on the writing-table]. Mr. Doolittle: will you be so goodas to step out on the balcony for a moment. I don’t want Eliza to havethe shock of your news until she has made it up with these twogentlemen. Would you mind?DOOLITTLE. As you wish, lady. Anything to help Henry to keep her off myhands. [He disappears through the window].The parlor-maid answers the bell. Pickering sits down in Doolittle’splace.MRS. HIGGINS. Ask Miss Doolittle to come down, please.THE PARLOR-MAID. Yes, mam. [She goes out].MRS. HIGGINS. Now, Henry: be good.HIGGINS. I am behaving myself perfectly.PICKERING. He is doing his best, Mrs. Higgins.A pause. Higgins throws back his head; stretches out his legs; andbegins to whistle.MRS. HIGGINS. Henry, dearest, you don’t look at all nice in thatattitude.HIGGINS [pulling himself together] I was not trying to look nice,mother.MRS. HIGGINS. It doesn’t matter, dear. I only wanted to make you speak.HIGGINS. Why?MRS. HIGGINS. Because you can’t speak and whistle at the same time.Higgins groans. Another very trying pause.HIGGINS [springing up, out of patience] Where the devil is that girl?Are we to wait here all day?Eliza enters, sunny, self-possessed, and giving a staggeringlyconvincing exhibition of ease of manner. She carries a littlework-basket, and is very much at home. Pickering is too much takenaback to rise.LIZA. How do you do, Professor Higgins? Are you quite well?HIGGINS [choking] Am I— [He can say no more].LIZA. But of course you are: you are never ill. So glad to see youagain, Colonel Pickering. [He rises hastily; and they shake hands].Quite chilly this morning, isn’t it? [She sits down on his left. Hesits beside her].HIGGINS. Don’t you dare try this game on me. I taught it to you; and itdoesn’t take me in. Get up and come home; and don’t be a fool.Eliza takes a piece of needlework from her basket, and begins to stitchat it, without taking the least notice of this outburst.MRS. HIGGINS. Very nicely put, indeed, Henry. No woman could resistsuch an invitation.HIGGINS. You let her alone, mother. Let her speak for herself. You willjolly soon see whether she has an idea that I haven’t put into her heador a word that I haven’t put into her mouth. I tell you I have createdthis thing out of the squashed cabbage leaves of Covent Garden; and nowshe pretends to play the fine lady with me.MRS. HIGGINS [placidly] Yes, dear; but you’ll sit down, won’t you?Higgins sits down again, savagely.LIZA [to Pickering, taking no apparent notice of Higgins, and workingaway deftly] Will you drop me altogether now that the experiment isover, Colonel Pickering?PICKERING. Oh don’t. You mustn’t think of it as an experiment. Itshocks me, somehow.LIZA. Oh, I’m only a squashed cabbage leaf.PICKERING [impulsively] No.LIZA [continuing quietly]—but I owe so much to you that I should bevery unhappy if you forgot me.PICKERING. It’s very kind of you to say so, Miss Doolittle.LIZA. It’s not because you paid for my dresses. I know you are generousto everybody with money. But it was from you that I learnt really nicemanners; and that is what makes one a lady, isn’t it? You see it was sovery difficult for me with the example of Professor Higgins alwaysbefore me. I was brought up to be just like him, unable to controlmyself, and using bad language on the slightest provocation. And Ishould never have known that ladies and gentlemen didn’t behave likethat if you hadn’t been there.HIGGINS. Well!!PICKERING. Oh, that’s only his way, you know. He doesn’t mean it.LIZA. Oh, I didn’t mean it either, when I was a flower girl. It wasonly my way. But you see I did it; and that’s what makes the differenceafter all.PICKERING. No doubt. Still, he taught you to speak; and I couldn’t havedone that, you know.LIZA [trivially] Of course: that is his profession.HIGGINS. Damnation!LIZA [continuing] It was just like learning to dance in the fashionableway: there was nothing more than that in it. But do you know what beganmy real education?PICKERING. What?LIZA [stopping her work for a moment] Your calling me Miss Doolittlethat day when I first came to Wimpole Street. That was the beginning ofself-respect for me. [She resumes her stitching]. And there were ahundred little things you never noticed, because they came naturally toyou. Things about standing up and taking off your hat and openingdoors—PICKERING. Oh, that was nothing.LIZA. Yes: things that showed you thought and felt about me as if Iwere something better than a scullery-maid; though of course I know youwould have been just the same to a scullery-maid if she had been let inthe drawing-room. You never took off your boots in the dining room whenI was there.PICKERING. You mustn’t mind that. Higgins takes off his boots all overthe place.LIZA. I know. I am not blaming him. It is his way, isn’t it? But itmade such a difference to me that you didn’t do it. You see, really andtruly, apart from the things anyone can pick up (the dressing and theproper way of speaking, and so on), the difference between a lady and aflower girl is not how she behaves, but how she’s treated. I shallalways be a flower girl to Professor Higgins, because he always treatsme as a flower girl, and always will; but I know I can be a lady toyou, because you always treat me as a lady, and always will.MRS. HIGGINS. Please don’t grind your teeth, Henry.PICKERING. Well, this is really very nice of you, Miss Doolittle.LIZA. I should like you to call me Eliza, now, if you would.PICKERING. Thank you. Eliza, of course.LIZA. And I should like Professor Higgins to call me Miss Doolittle.HIGGINS. I’ll see you damned first.MRS. HIGGINS. Henry! Henry!PICKERING [laughing] Why don’t you slang back at him? Don’t stand it.It would do him a lot of good.LIZA. I can’t. I could have done it once; but now I can’t go back toit. Last night, when I was wandering about, a girl spoke to me; and Itried to get back into the old way with her; but it was no use. Youtold me, you know, that when a child is brought to a foreign country,it picks up the language in a few weeks, and forgets its own. Well, Iam a child in your country. I have forgotten my own language, and canspeak nothing but yours. That’s the real break-off with the corner ofTottenham Court Road. Leaving Wimpole Street finishes it.PICKERING [much alarmed] Oh! but you’re coming back to Wimpole Street,aren’t you? You’ll forgive Higgins?HIGGINS [rising] Forgive! Will she, by George! Let her go. Let her findout how she can get on without us. She will relapse into the gutter inthree weeks without me at her elbow.Doolittle appears at the centre window. With a look of dignifiedreproach at Higgins, he comes slowly and silently to his daughter, who,with her back to the window, is unconscious of his approach.PICKERING. He’s incorrigible, Eliza. You won’t relapse, will you?LIZA. No: Not now. Never again. I have learnt my lesson. I don’tbelieve I could utter one of the old sounds if I tried. [Doolittletouches her on her left shoulder. She drops her work, losing herself-possession utterly at the spectacle of her father’s splendor]A—a—a—a—a—ah—ow—ooh!HIGGINS [with a crow of triumph] Aha! Just so. A—a—a—a—ahowooh!A—a—a—a—ahowooh ! A—a—a—a—ahowooh! Victory! Victory! [He throwshimself on the divan, folding his arms, and spraddling arrogantly].DOOLITTLE. Can you blame the girl? Don’t look at me like that, Eliza.It ain’t my fault. I’ve come into money.LIZA. You must have touched a millionaire this time, dad.DOOLITTLE. I have. But I’m dressed something special today. I’m goingto St. George’s, Hanover Square. Your stepmother is going to marry me.LIZA [angrily] You’re going to let yourself down to marry that lowcommon woman!PICKERING [quietly] He ought to, Eliza. [To Doolittle] Why has shechanged her mind?DOOLITTLE [sadly] Intimidated, Governor. Intimidated. Middle classmorality claims its victim. Won’t you put on your hat, Liza, and comeand see me turned off?LIZA. If the Colonel says I must, I—I’ll [almost sobbing] I’ll demeanmyself. And get insulted for my pains, like enough.DOOLITTLE. Don’t be afraid: she never comes to words with anyone now,poor woman! respectability has broke all the spirit out of her.PICKERING [squeezing Eliza’s elbow gently] Be kind to them, Eliza. Makethe best of it.LIZA [forcing a little smile for him through her vexation] Oh well,just to show there’s no ill feeling. I’ll be back in a moment. [Shegoes out].DOOLITTLE [sitting down beside Pickering] I feel uncommon nervous aboutthe ceremony, Colonel. I wish you’d come and see me through it.PICKERING. But you’ve been through it before, man. You were married toEliza’s mother.DOOLITTLE. Who told you that, Colonel?PICKERING. Well, nobody told me. But I concluded naturally—DOOLITTLE. No: that ain’t the natural way, Colonel: it’s only themiddle class way. My way was always the undeserving way. But don’t saynothing to Eliza. She don’t know: I always had a delicacy about tellingher.PICKERING. Quite right. We’ll leave it so, if you don’t mind.DOOLITTLE. And you’ll come to the church, Colonel, and put me throughstraight?PICKERING. With pleasure. As far as a bachelor can.MRS. HIGGINS. May I come, Mr. Doolittle? I should be very sorry to missyour wedding.DOOLITTLE. I should indeed be honored by your condescension, ma’am; andmy poor old woman would take it as a tremenjous compliment. She’s beenvery low, thinking of the happy days that are no more.MRS. HIGGINS [rising] I’ll order the carriage and get ready. [The menrise, except Higgins]. I shan’t be more than fifteen minutes. [As shegoes to the door Eliza comes in, hatted and buttoning her gloves]. I’mgoing to the church to see your father married, Eliza. You had bettercome in the brougham with me. Colonel Pickering can go on with thebridegroom.Mrs. Higgins goes out. Eliza comes to the middle of the room betweenthe centre window and the ottoman. Pickering joins her.DOOLITTLE. Bridegroom! What a word! It makes a man realize hisposition, somehow. [He takes up his hat and goes towards the door].PICKERING. Before I go, Eliza, do forgive him and come back to us.LIZA. I don’t think papa would allow me. Would you, dad?DOOLITTLE [sad but magnanimous] They played you off very cunning,Eliza, them two sportsmen. If it had been only one of them, you couldhave nailed him. But you see, there was two; and one of them chaperonedthe other, as you might say. [To Pickering] It was artful of you,Colonel; but I bear no malice: I should have done the same myself. Ibeen the victim of one woman after another all my life; and I don’tgrudge you two getting the better of Eliza. I shan’t interfere. It’stime for us to go, Colonel. So long, Henry. See you in St. George’s,Eliza. [He goes out].PICKERING [coaxing] Do stay with us, Eliza. [He follows Doolittle].Eliza goes out on the balcony to avoid being alone with Higgins. Herises and joins her there. She immediately comes back into the room andmakes for the door; but he goes along the balcony quickly and gets hisback to the door before she reaches it.HIGGINS. Well, Eliza, you’ve had a bit of your own back, as you callit. Have you had enough? and are you going to be reasonable? Or do youwant any more?LIZA. You want me back only to pick up your slippers and put up withyour tempers and fetch and carry for you.HIGGINS. I haven’t said I wanted you back at all.LIZA. Oh, indeed. Then what are we talking about?HIGGINS. About you, not about me. If you come back I shall treat youjust as I have always treated you. I can’t change my nature; and Idon’t intend to change my manners. My manners are exactly the same asColonel Pickering’s.LIZA. That’s not true. He treats a flower girl as if she was a duchess.HIGGINS. And I treat a duchess as if she was a flower girl.LIZA. I see. [She turns away composedly, and sits on the ottoman,facing the window]. The same to everybody.HIGGINS. Just so.LIZA. Like father.HIGGINS [grinning, a little taken down] Without accepting thecomparison at all points, Eliza, it’s quite true that your father isnot a snob, and that he will be quite at home in any station of life towhich his eccentric destiny may call him. [Seriously] The great secret,Eliza, is not having bad manners or good manners or any otherparticular sort of manners, but having the same manner for all humansouls: in short, behaving as if you were in Heaven, where there are nothird-class carriages, and one soul is as good as another.LIZA. Amen. You are a born preacher.HIGGINS [irritated] The question is not whether I treat you rudely, butwhether you ever heard me treat anyone else better.LIZA [with sudden sincerity] I don’t care how you treat me. I don’tmind your swearing at me. I don’t mind a black eye: I’ve had one beforethis. But [standing up and facing him] I won’t be passed over.HIGGINS. Then get out of my way; for I won’t stop for you. You talkabout me as if I were a motor bus.LIZA. So you are a motor bus: all bounce and go, and no considerationfor anyone. But I can do without you: don’t think I can’t.HIGGINS. I know you can. I told you you could.LIZA [wounded, getting away from him to the other side of the ottomanwith her face to the hearth] I know you did, you brute. You wanted toget rid of me.HIGGINS. Liar.LIZA. Thank you. [She sits down with dignity].HIGGINS. You never asked yourself, I suppose, whether I could dowithout YOU.LIZA [earnestly] Don’t you try to get round me. You’ll HAVE to dowithout me.HIGGINS [arrogant] I can do without anybody. I have my own soul: my ownspark of divine fire. But [with sudden humility] I shall miss you,Eliza. [He sits down near her on the ottoman]. I have learnt somethingfrom your idiotic notions: I confess that humbly and gratefully. And Ihave grown accustomed to your voice and appearance. I like them, rather.LIZA. Well, you have both of them on your gramophone and in your bookof photographs. When you feel lonely without me, you can turn themachine on. It’s got no feelings to hurt.HIGGINS. I can’t turn your soul on. Leave me those feelings; and youcan take away the voice and the face. They are not you.LIZA. Oh, you ARE a devil. You can twist the heart in a girl as easy assome could twist her arms to hurt her. Mrs. Pearce warned me. Time andagain she has wanted to leave you; and you always got round her at thelast minute. And you don’t care a bit for her. And you don’t care a bitfor me.HIGGINS. I care for life, for humanity; and you are a part of it thathas come my way and been built into my house. What more can you oranyone ask?LIZA. I won’t care for anybody that doesn’t care for me.HIGGINS. Commercial principles, Eliza. Like [reproducing her CoventGarden pronunciation with professional exactness] s’yollin voylets[selling violets], isn’t it?LIZA. Don’t sneer at me. It’s mean to sneer at me.HIGGINS. I have never sneered in my life. Sneering doesn’t becomeeither the human face or the human soul. I am expressing my righteouscontempt for Commercialism. I don’t and won’t trade in affection. Youcall me a brute because you couldn’t buy a claim on me by fetching myslippers and finding my spectacles. You were a fool: I think a womanfetching a man’s slippers is a disgusting sight: did I ever fetch YOURslippers? I think a good deal more of you for throwing them in my face.No use slaving for me and then saying you want to be cared for: whocares for a slave? If you come back, come back for the sake of goodfellowship; for you’ll get nothing else. You’ve had a thousand times asmuch out of me as I have out of you; and if you dare to set up yourlittle dog’s tricks of fetching and carrying slippers against mycreation of a Duchess Eliza, I’ll slam the door in your silly face.LIZA. What did you do it for if you didn’t care for me?HIGGINS [heartily] Why, because it was my job.LIZA. You never thought of the trouble it would make for me.HIGGINS. Would the world ever have been made if its maker had beenafraid of making trouble? Making life means making trouble. There’sonly one way of escaping trouble; and that’s killing things. Cowards,you notice, are always shrieking to have troublesome people killed.LIZA. I’m no preacher: I don’t notice things like that. I notice thatyou don’t notice me.HIGGINS [jumping up and walking about intolerantly] Eliza: you’re anidiot. I waste the treasures of my Miltonic mind by spreading thembefore you. Once for all, understand that I go my way and do my workwithout caring twopence what happens to either of us. I am notintimidated, like your father and your stepmother. So you can come backor go to the devil: which you please.LIZA. What am I to come back for?HIGGINS [bouncing up on his knees on the ottoman and leaning over it toher] For the fun of it. That’s why I took you on.LIZA [with averted face] And you may throw me out tomorrow if I don’tdo everything you want me to?HIGGINS. Yes; and you may walk out tomorrow if I don’t do everythingYOU want me to.LIZA. And live with my stepmother?HIGGINS. Yes, or sell flowers.LIZA. Oh! if I only COULD go back to my flower basket! I should beindependent of both you and father and all the world! Why did you takemy independence from me? Why did I give it up? I’m a slave now, for allmy fine clothes.HIGGINS. Not a bit. I’ll adopt you as my daughter and settle money onyou if you like. Or would you rather marry Pickering?LIZA [looking fiercely round at him] I wouldn’t marry YOU if you askedme; and you’re nearer my age than what he is.HIGGINS [gently] Than he is: not “than what he is.”LIZA [losing her temper and rising] I’ll talk as I like. You’re not myteacher now.HIGGINS [reflectively] I don’t suppose Pickering would, though. He’s asconfirmed an old bachelor as I am.LIZA. That’s not what I want; and don’t you think it. I’ve always hadchaps enough wanting me that way. Freddy Hill writes to me twice andthree times a day, sheets and sheets.HIGGINS [disagreeably surprised] Damn his impudence! [He recoils andfinds himself sitting on his heels].LIZA. He has a right to if he likes, poor lad. And he does love me.HIGGINS [getting off the ottoman] You have no right to encourage him.LIZA. Every girl has a right to be loved.HIGGINS. What! By fools like that?LIZA. Freddy’s not a fool. And if he’s weak and poor and wants me, maybe he’d make me happier than my betters that bully me and don’t want me.HIGGINS. Can he MAKE anything of you? That’s the point.LIZA. Perhaps I could make something of him. But I never thought of usmaking anything of one another; and you never think of anything else. Ionly want to be natural.HIGGINS. In short, you want me to be as infatuated about you as Freddy?Is that it?LIZA. No I don’t. That’s not the sort of feeling I want from you. Anddon’t you be too sure of yourself or of me. I could have been a badgirl if I’d liked. I’ve seen more of some things than you, for all yourlearning. Girls like me can drag gentlemen down to make love to themeasy enough. And they wish each other dead the next minute.HIGGINS. Of course they do. Then what in thunder are we quarrellingabout?LIZA [much troubled] I want a little kindness. I know I’m a commonignorant girl, and you a book-learned gentleman; but I’m not dirt underyour feet. What I done [correcting herself] what I did was not for thedresses and the taxis: I did it because we were pleasant together and Icome—came—to care for you; not to want you to make love to me, andnot forgetting the difference between us, but more friendly like.HIGGINS. Well, of course. That’s just how I feel. And how Pickeringfeels. Eliza: you’re a fool.LIZA. That’s not a proper answer to give me [she sinks on the chair atthe writing-table in tears].HIGGINS. It’s all you’ll get until you stop being a common idiot. Ifyou’re going to be a lady, you’ll have to give up feeling neglected ifthe men you know don’t spend half their time snivelling over you andthe other half giving you black eyes. If you can’t stand the coldnessof my sort of life, and the strain of it, go back to the gutter. Worktil you are more a brute than a human being; and then cuddle andsquabble and drink til you fall asleep. Oh, it’s a fine life, the lifeof the gutter. It’s real: it’s warm: it’s violent: you can feel itthrough the thickest skin: you can taste it and smell it without anytraining or any work. Not like Science and Literature and ClassicalMusic and Philosophy and Art. You find me cold, unfeeling, selfish,don’t you? Very well: be off with you to the sort of people you like.Marry some sentimental hog or other with lots of money, and a thickpair of lips to kiss you with and a thick pair of boots to kick youwith. If you can’t appreciate what you’ve got, you’d better get whatyou can appreciate.LIZA [desperate] Oh, you are a cruel tyrant. I can’t talk to you: youturn everything against me: I’m always in the wrong. But you know verywell all the time that you’re nothing but a bully. You know I can’t goback to the gutter, as you call it, and that I have no real friends inthe world but you and the Colonel. You know well I couldn’t bear tolive with a low common man after you two; and it’s wicked and cruel ofyou to insult me by pretending I could. You think I must go back toWimpole Street because I have nowhere else to go but father’s. Butdon’t you be too sure that you have me under your feet to be trampledon and talked down. I’ll marry Freddy, I will, as soon as he’s able tosupport me.HIGGINS [sitting down beside her] Rubbish! you shall marry anambassador. You shall marry the Governor-General of India or theLord-Lieutenant of Ireland, or somebody who wants a deputy-queen. I’mnot going to have my masterpiece thrown away on Freddy.LIZA. You think I like you to say that. But I haven’t forgot what yousaid a minute ago; and I won’t be coaxed round as if I was a baby or apuppy. If I can’t have kindness, I’ll have independence.HIGGINS. Independence? That’s middle class blasphemy. We are alldependent on one another, every soul of us on earth.LIZA [rising determinedly] I’ll let you see whether I’m dependent onyou. If you can preach, I can teach. I’ll go and be a teacher.HIGGINS. What’ll you teach, in heaven’s name?LIZA. What you taught me. I’ll teach phonetics.HIGGINS. Ha! Ha! Ha!LIZA. I’ll offer myself as an assistant to Professor Nepean.HIGGINS [rising in a fury] What! That impostor! that humbug! thattoadying ignoramus! Teach him my methods! my discoveries! You take onestep in his direction and I’ll wring your neck. [He lays hands on her].Do you hear?LIZA [defiantly non-resistant] Wring away. What do I care? I knew you’dstrike me some day. [He lets her go, stamping with rage at havingforgotten himself, and recoils so hastily that he stumbles back intohis seat on the ottoman]. Aha! Now I know how to deal with you. What afool I was not to think of it before! You can’t take away the knowledgeyou gave me. You said I had a finer ear than you. And I can be civiland kind to people, which is more than you can. Aha! That’s done you,Henry Higgins, it has. Now I don’t care that [snapping her fingers] foryour bullying and your big talk. I’ll advertize it in the papers thatyour duchess is only a flower girl that you taught, and that she’llteach anybody to be a duchess just the same in six months for athousand guineas. Oh, when I think of myself crawling under your feetand being trampled on and called names, when all the time I had only tolift up my finger to be as good as you, I could just kick myself.HIGGINS [wondering at her] You damned impudent slut, you! But it’sbetter than snivelling; better than fetching slippers and findingspectacles, isn’t it? [Rising] By George, Eliza, I said I’d make awoman of you; and I have. I like you like this.LIZA. Yes: you turn round and make up to me now that I’m not afraid ofyou, and can do without you.HIGGINS. Of course I do, you little fool. Five minutes ago you werelike a millstone round my neck. Now you’re a tower of strength: aconsort battleship. You and I and Pickering will be three old bachelorstogether instead of only two men and a silly girl.Mrs. Higgins returns, dressed for the wedding. Eliza instantly becomescool and elegant.MRS. HIGGINS. The carriage is waiting, Eliza. Are you ready?LIZA. Quite. Is the Professor coming?MRS. HIGGINS. Certainly not. He can’t behave himself in church. Hemakes remarks out loud all the time on the clergyman’s pronunciation.LIZA. Then I shall not see you again, Professor. Good bye. [She goes tothe door].MRS. HIGGINS [coming to Higgins] Good-bye, dear.HIGGINS. Good-bye, mother. [He is about to kiss her, when he recollectssomething]. Oh, by the way, Eliza, order a ham and a Stilton cheese,will you? And buy me a pair of reindeer gloves, number eights, and atie to match that new suit of mine, at Eale & Binman’s. You can choosethe color. [His cheerful, careless, vigorous voice shows that he isincorrigible].LIZA [disdainfully] Buy them yourself. [She sweeps out].MRS. HIGGINS. I’m afraid you’ve spoiled that girl, Henry. But nevermind, dear: I’ll buy you the tie and gloves.HIGGINS [sunnily] Oh, don’t bother. She’ll buy em all right enough.Good-bye.They kiss. Mrs. Higgins runs out. Higgins, left alone, rattles his cashin his pocket; chuckles; and disports himself in a highlyself-satisfied manner.                    ***********************The rest of the story need not be shown in action, and indeed, wouldhardly need telling if our imaginations were not so enfeebled by theirlazy dependence on the ready-makes and reach-me-downs of the ragshop inwhich Romance keeps its stock of “happy endings” to misfit all stories.Now, the history of Eliza Doolittle, though called a romance because ofthe transfiguration it records seems exceedingly improbable, is commonenough. Such transfigurations have been achieved by hundreds ofresolutely ambitious young women since Nell Gwynne set them the exampleby playing queens and fascinating kings in the theatre in which shebegan by selling oranges. Nevertheless, people in all directions haveassumed, for no other reason than that she became the heroine of aromance, that she must have married the hero of it. This is unbearable,not only because her little drama, if acted on such a thoughtlessassumption, must be spoiled, but because the true sequel is patent toanyone with a sense of human nature in general, and of feminineinstinct in particular.Eliza, in telling Higgins she would not marry him if he asked her, wasnot coquetting: she was announcing a well-considered decision. When abachelor interests, and dominates, and teaches, and becomes importantto a spinster, as Higgins with Eliza, she always, if she has characterenough to be capable of it, considers very seriously indeed whether shewill play for becoming that bachelor’s wife, especially if he is solittle interested in marriage that a determined and devoted woman mightcapture him if she set herself resolutely to do it. Her decision willdepend a good deal on whether she is really free to choose; and that,again, will depend on her age and income. If she is at the end of heryouth, and has no security for her livelihood, she will marry himbecause she must marry anybody who will provide for her. But at Eliza’sage a good-looking girl does not feel that pressure; she feels free topick and choose. She is therefore guided by her instinct in the matter.Eliza’s instinct tells her not to marry Higgins. It does not tell herto give him up. It is not in the slightest doubt as to his remainingone of the strongest personal interests in her life. It would be verysorely strained if there was another woman likely to supplant her withhim. But as she feels sure of him on that last point, she has no doubtat all as to her course, and would not have any, even if the differenceof twenty years in age, which seems so great to youth, did not existbetween them.As our own instincts are not appealed to by her conclusion, let us seewhether we cannot discover some reason in it. When Higgins excused hisindifference to young women on the ground that they had an irresistiblerival in his mother, he gave the clue to his inveterateold-bachelordom. The case is uncommon only to the extent thatremarkable mothers are uncommon. If an imaginative boy has asufficiently rich mother who has intelligence, personal grace, dignityof character without harshness, and a cultivated sense of the best artof her time to enable her to make her house beautiful, she sets astandard for him against which very few women can struggle, besideseffecting for him a disengagement of his affections, his sense ofbeauty, and his idealism from his specifically sexual impulses. Thismakes him a standing puzzle to the huge number of uncultivated peoplewho have been brought up in tasteless homes by commonplace ordisagreeable parents, and to whom, consequently, literature, painting,sculpture, music, and affectionate personal relations come as modes ofsex if they come at all. The word passion means nothing else to them;and that Higgins could have a passion for phonetics and idealize hismother instead of Eliza, would seem to them absurd and unnatural.Nevertheless, when we look round and see that hardly anyone is too uglyor disagreeable to find a wife or a husband if he or she wants one,whilst many old maids and bachelors are above the average in qualityand culture, we cannot help suspecting that the disentanglement of sexfrom the associations with which it is so commonly confused, adisentanglement which persons of genius achieve by sheer intellectualanalysis, is sometimes produced or aided by parental fascination.Now, though Eliza was incapable of thus explaining to herself Higgins’sformidable powers of resistance to the charm that prostrated Freddy atthe first glance, she was instinctively aware that she could neverobtain a complete grip of him, or come between him and his mother (thefirst necessity of the married woman). To put it shortly, she knew thatfor some mysterious reason he had not the makings of a married man inhim, according to her conception of a husband as one to whom she wouldbe his nearest and fondest and warmest interest. Even had there been nomother-rival, she would still have refused to accept an interest inherself that was secondary to philosophic interests. Had Mrs. Higginsdied, there would still have been Milton and the Universal Alphabet.Landor’s remark that to those who have the greatest power of loving,love is a secondary affair, would not have recommended Landor to Eliza.Put that along with her resentment of Higgins’s domineeringsuperiority, and her mistrust of his coaxing cleverness in gettinground her and evading her wrath when he had gone too far with hisimpetuous bullying, and you will see that Eliza’s instinct had goodgrounds for warning her not to marry her Pygmalion.And now, whom did Eliza marry? For if Higgins was a predestinate oldbachelor, she was most certainly not a predestinate old maid. Well,that can be told very shortly to those who have not guessed it from theindications she has herself given them.Almost immediately after Eliza is stung into proclaiming her considereddetermination not to marry Higgins, she mentions the fact that youngMr. Frederick Eynsford Hill is pouring out his love for her dailythrough the post. Now Freddy is young, practically twenty years youngerthan Higgins: he is a gentleman (or, as Eliza would qualify him, atoff), and speaks like one; he is nicely dressed, is treated by theColonel as an equal, loves her unaffectedly, and is not her master, norever likely to dominate her in spite of his advantage of socialstanding. Eliza has no use for the foolish romantic tradition that allwomen love to be mastered, if not actually bullied and beaten. “Whenyou go to women,” says Nietzsche, “take your whip with you.” Sensibledespots have never confined that precaution to women: they have takentheir whips with them when they have dealt with men, and been slavishlyidealized by the men over whom they have flourished the whip much morethan by women. No doubt there are slavish women as well as slavish men;and women, like men, admire those that are stronger than themselves.But to admire a strong person and to live under that strong person’sthumb are two different things. The weak may not be admired andhero-worshipped; but they are by no means disliked or shunned; and theynever seem to have the least difficulty in marrying people who are toogood for them. They may fail in emergencies; but life is not one longemergency: it is mostly a string of situations for which no exceptionalstrength is needed, and with which even rather weak people can cope ifthey have a stronger partner to help them out. Accordingly, it is atruth everywhere in evidence that strong people, masculine or feminine,not only do not marry stronger people, but do not show any preferencefor them in selecting their friends. When a lion meets another with alouder roar “the first lion thinks the last a bore.” The man or womanwho feels strong enough for two, seeks for every other quality in apartner than strength.The converse is also true. Weak people want to marry strong people whodo not frighten them too much; and this often leads them to make themistake we describe metaphorically as “biting off more than they canchew.” They want too much for too little; and when the bargain isunreasonable beyond all bearing, the union becomes impossible: it endsin the weaker party being either discarded or borne as a cross, whichis worse. People who are not only weak, but silly or obtuse as well,are often in these difficulties.This being the state of human affairs, what is Eliza fairly sure to dowhen she is placed between Freddy and Higgins? Will she look forward toa lifetime of fetching Higgins’s slippers or to a lifetime of Freddyfetching hers? There can be no doubt about the answer. Unless Freddy isbiologically repulsive to her, and Higgins biologically attractive to adegree that overwhelms all her other instincts, she will, if shemarries either of them, marry Freddy.And that is just what Eliza did.Complications ensued; but they were economic, not romantic. Freddy hadno money and no occupation. His mother’s jointure, a last relic of theopulence of Largelady Park, had enabled her to struggle along inEarlscourt with an air of gentility, but not to procure any serioussecondary education for her children, much less give the boy aprofession. A clerkship at thirty shillings a week was beneath Freddy’sdignity, and extremely distasteful to him besides. His prospectsconsisted of a hope that if he kept up appearances somebody would dosomething for him. The something appeared vaguely to his imagination asa private secretaryship or a sinecure of some sort. To his mother itperhaps appeared as a marriage to some lady of means who could notresist her boy’s niceness. Fancy her feelings when he married a flowergirl who had become declassee under extraordinary circumstances whichwere now notorious!It is true that Eliza’s situation did not seem wholly ineligible. Herfather, though formerly a dustman, and now fantastically disclassed,had become extremely popular in the smartest society by a social talentwhich triumphed over every prejudice and every disadvantage. Rejectedby the middle class, which he loathed, he had shot up at once into thehighest circles by his wit, his dustmanship (which he carried like abanner), and his Nietzschean transcendence of good and evil. Atintimate ducal dinners he sat on the right hand of the Duchess; and incountry houses he smoked in the pantry and was made much of by thebutler when he was not feeding in the dining-room and being consultedby cabinet ministers. But he found it almost as hard to do all this onfour thousand a year as Mrs. Eynsford Hill to live in Earlscourt on anincome so pitiably smaller that I have not the heart to disclose itsexact figure. He absolutely refused to add the last straw to his burdenby contributing to Eliza’s support.Thus Freddy and Eliza, now Mr. and Mrs. Eynsford Hill, would have spenta penniless honeymoon but for a wedding present of 500 pounds from theColonel to Eliza. It lasted a long time because Freddy did not know howto spend money, never having had any to spend, and Eliza, sociallytrained by a pair of old bachelors, wore her clothes as long as theyheld together and looked pretty, without the least regard to theirbeing many months out of fashion. Still, 500 pounds will not last twoyoung people for ever; and they both knew, and Eliza felt as well, thatthey must shift for themselves in the end. She could quarter herself onWimpole Street because it had come to be her home; but she was quiteaware that she ought not to quarter Freddy there, and that it would notbe good for his character if she did.Not that the Wimpole Street bachelors objected. When she consultedthem, Higgins declined to be bothered about her housing problem whenthat solution was so simple. Eliza’s desire to have Freddy in the housewith her seemed of no more importance than if she had wanted an extrapiece of bedroom furniture. Pleas as to Freddy’s character, and themoral obligation on him to earn his own living, were lost on Higgins.He denied that Freddy had any character, and declared that if he triedto do any useful work some competent person would have the trouble ofundoing it: a procedure involving a net loss to the community, andgreat unhappiness to Freddy himself, who was obviously intended byNature for such light work as amusing Eliza, which, Higgins declared,was a much more useful and honorable occupation than working in thecity. When Eliza referred again to her project of teaching phonetics,Higgins abated not a jot of his violent opposition to it. He said shewas not within ten years of being qualified to meddle with his petsubject; and as it was evident that the Colonel agreed with him, shefelt she could not go against them in this grave matter, and that shehad no right, without Higgins’s consent, to exploit the knowledge hehad given her; for his knowledge seemed to her as much his privateproperty as his watch: Eliza was no communist. Besides, she wassuperstitiously devoted to them both, more entirely and frankly afterher marriage than before it.It was the Colonel who finally solved the problem, which had cost himmuch perplexed cogitation. He one day asked Eliza, rather shyly,whether she had quite given up her notion of keeping a flower shop. Shereplied that she had thought of it, but had put it out of her head,because the Colonel had said, that day at Mrs. Higgins’s, that it wouldnever do. The Colonel confessed that when he said that, he had notquite recovered from the dazzling impression of the day before. Theybroke the matter to Higgins that evening. The sole comment vouchsafedby him very nearly led to a serious quarrel with Eliza. It was to theeffect that she would have in Freddy an ideal errand boy.Freddy himself was next sounded on the subject. He said he had beenthinking of a shop himself; though it had presented itself to hispennilessness as a small place in which Eliza should sell tobacco atone counter whilst he sold newspapers at the opposite one. But heagreed that it would be extraordinarily jolly to go early every morningwith Eliza to Covent Garden and buy flowers on the scene of their firstmeeting: a sentiment which earned him many kisses from his wife. Headded that he had always been afraid to propose anything of the sort,because Clara would make an awful row about a step that must damage hermatrimonial chances, and his mother could not be expected to like itafter clinging for so many years to that step of the social ladder onwhich retail trade is impossible.This difficulty was removed by an event highly unexpected by Freddy’smother. Clara, in the course of her incursions into those artisticcircles which were the highest within her reach, discovered that herconversational qualifications were expected to include a grounding inthe novels of Mr. H.G. Wells. She borrowed them in various directionsso energetically that she swallowed them all within two months. Theresult was a conversion of a kind quite common today. A modern Acts ofthe Apostles would fill fifty whole Bibles if anyone were capable ofwriting it.Poor Clara, who appeared to Higgins and his mother as a disagreeableand ridiculous person, and to her own mother as in some inexplicableway a social failure, had never seen herself in either light; for,though to some extent ridiculed and mimicked in West Kensington likeeverybody else there, she was accepted as a rational and normal—orshall we say inevitable?—sort of human being. At worst they called herThe Pusher; but to them no more than to herself had it ever occurredthat she was pushing the air, and pushing it in a wrong direction.Still, she was not happy. She was growing desperate. Her one asset, thefact that her mother was what the Epsom greengrocer called a carriagelady had no exchange value, apparently. It had prevented her fromgetting educated, because the only education she could have affordedwas education with the Earlscourt green grocer’s daughter. It had ledher to seek the society of her mother’s class; and that class simplywould not have her, because she was much poorer than the greengrocer,and, far from being able to afford a maid, could not afford even ahousemaid, and had to scrape along at home with an illiberally treatedgeneral servant. Under such circumstances nothing could give her an airof being a genuine product of Largelady Park. And yet its traditionmade her regard a marriage with anyone within her reach as anunbearable humiliation. Commercial people and professional people in asmall way were odious to her. She ran after painters and novelists; butshe did not charm them; and her bold attempts to pick up and practiseartistic and literary talk irritated them. She was, in short, an utterfailure, an ignorant, incompetent, pretentious, unwelcome, penniless,useless little snob; and though she did not admit thesedisqualifications (for nobody ever faces unpleasant truths of this kinduntil the possibility of a way out dawns on them) she felt theireffects too keenly to be satisfied with her position.Clara had a startling eyeopener when, on being suddenly wakened toenthusiasm by a girl of her own age who dazzled her and produced in hera gushing desire to take her for a model, and gain her friendship, shediscovered that this exquisite apparition had graduated from the gutterin a few months’ time. It shook her so violently, that when Mr. H. G.Wells lifted her on the point of his puissant pen, and placed her atthe angle of view from which the life she was leading and the societyto which she clung appeared in its true relation to real human needsand worthy social structure, he effected a conversion and a convictionof sin comparable to the most sensational feats of General Booth orGypsy Smith. Clara’s snobbery went bang. Life suddenly began to movewith her. Without knowing how or why, she began to make friends andenemies. Some of the acquaintances to whom she had been a tedious orindifferent or ridiculous affliction, dropped her: others becamecordial. To her amazement she found that some “quite nice” people weresaturated with Wells, and that this accessibility to ideas was thesecret of their niceness. People she had thought deeply religious, andhad tried to conciliate on that tack with disastrous results, suddenlytook an interest in her, and revealed a hostility to conventionalreligion which she had never conceived possible except among the mostdesperate characters. They made her read Galsworthy; and Galsworthyexposed the vanity of Largelady Park and finished her. It exasperatedher to think that the dungeon in which she had languished for so manyunhappy years had been unlocked all the time, and that the impulses shehad so carefully struggled with and stifled for the sake of keepingwell with society, were precisely those by which alone she could havecome into any sort of sincere human contact. In the radiance of thesediscoveries, and the tumult of their reaction, she made a fool ofherself as freely and conspicuously as when she so rashly adoptedEliza’s expletive in Mrs. Higgins’s drawing-room; for the new-bornWellsian had to find her bearings almost as ridiculously as a baby; butnobody hates a baby for its ineptitudes, or thinks the worse of it fortrying to eat the matches; and Clara lost no friends by her follies.They laughed at her to her face this time; and she had to defendherself and fight it out as best she could.When Freddy paid a visit to Earlscourt (which he never did when hecould possibly help it) to make the desolating announcement that he andhis Eliza were thinking of blackening the Largelady scutcheon byopening a shop, he found the little household already convulsed by aprior announcement from Clara that she also was going to work in an oldfurniture shop in Dover Street, which had been started by a fellowWellsian. This appointment Clara owed, after all, to her old socialaccomplishment of Push. She had made up her mind that, cost what itmight, she would see Mr. Wells in the flesh; and she had achieved herend at a garden party. She had better luck than so rash an enterprisedeserved. Mr. Wells came up to her expectations. Age had not witheredhim, nor could custom stale his infinite variety in half an hour. Hispleasant neatness and compactness, his small hands and feet, histeeming ready brain, his unaffected accessibility, and a certain fineapprehensiveness which stamped him as susceptible from his topmost hairto his tipmost toe, proved irresistible. Clara talked of nothing elsefor weeks and weeks afterwards. And as she happened to talk to the ladyof the furniture shop, and that lady also desired above all things toknow Mr. Wells and sell pretty things to him, she offered Clara a jobon the chance of achieving that end through her.And so it came about that Eliza’s luck held, and the expectedopposition to the flower shop melted away. The shop is in the arcade ofa railway station not very far from the Victoria and Albert Museum; andif you live in that neighborhood you may go there any day and buy abuttonhole from Eliza.Now here is a last opportunity for romance. Would you not like to beassured that the shop was an immense success, thanks to Eliza’s charmsand her early business experience in Covent Garden? Alas! the truth isthe truth: the shop did not pay for a long time, simply because Elizaand her Freddy did not know how to keep it. True, Eliza had not tobegin at the very beginning: she knew the names and prices of thecheaper flowers; and her elation was unbounded when she found thatFreddy, like all youths educated at cheap, pretentious, and thoroughlyinefficient schools, knew a little Latin. It was very little, butenough to make him appear to her a Porson or Bentley, and to put him athis ease with botanical nomenclature. Unfortunately he knew nothingelse; and Eliza, though she could count money up to eighteen shillingsor so, and had acquired a certain familiarity with the language ofMilton from her struggles to qualify herself for winning Higgins’s bet,could not write out a bill without utterly disgracing theestablishment. Freddy’s power of stating in Latin that Balbus built awall and that Gaul was divided into three parts did not carry with itthe slightest knowledge of accounts or business: Colonel Pickering hadto explain to him what a cheque book and a bank account meant. And thepair were by no means easily teachable. Freddy backed up Eliza in herobstinate refusal to believe that they could save money by engaging abookkeeper with some knowledge of the business. How, they argued, couldyou possibly save money by going to extra expense when you alreadycould not make both ends meet? But the Colonel, after making the endsmeet over and over again, at last gently insisted; and Eliza, humbledto the dust by having to beg from him so often, and stung by theuproarious derision of Higgins, to whom the notion of Freddy succeedingat anything was a joke that never palled, grasped the fact thatbusiness, like phonetics, has to be learned.On the piteous spectacle of the pair spending their evenings inshorthand schools and polytechnic classes, learning bookkeeping andtypewriting with incipient junior clerks, male and female, from theelementary schools, let me not dwell. There were even classes at theLondon School of Economics, and a humble personal appeal to thedirector of that institution to recommend a course bearing on theflower business. He, being a humorist, explained to them the method ofthe celebrated Dickensian essay on Chinese Metaphysics by the gentlemanwho read an article on China and an article on Metaphysics and combinedthe information. He suggested that they should combine the LondonSchool with Kew Gardens. Eliza, to whom the procedure of the Dickensiangentleman seemed perfectly correct (as in fact it was) and not in theleast funny (which was only her ignorance) took his advice with entiregravity. But the effort that cost her the deepest humiliation was arequest to Higgins, whose pet artistic fancy, next to Milton’s verse,was calligraphy, and who himself wrote a most beautiful Italian hand,that he would teach her to write. He declared that she was congenitallyincapable of forming a single letter worthy of the least of Milton’swords; but she persisted; and again he suddenly threw himself into thetask of teaching her with a combination of stormy intensity,concentrated patience, and occasional bursts of interestingdisquisition on the beauty and nobility, the august mission anddestiny, of human handwriting. Eliza ended by acquiring an extremelyuncommercial script which was a positive extension of her personalbeauty, and spending three times as much on stationery as anyone elsebecause certain qualities and shapes of paper became indispensable toher. She could not even address an envelope in the usual way because itmade the margins all wrong.Their commercial school days were a period of disgrace and despair forthe young couple. They seemed to be learning nothing about flowershops. At last they gave it up as hopeless, and shook the dust of theshorthand schools, and the polytechnics, and the London School ofEconomics from their feet for ever. Besides, the business was in somemysterious way beginning to take care of itself. They had somehowforgotten their objections to employing other people. They came to theconclusion that their own way was the best, and that they had really aremarkable talent for business. The Colonel, who had been compelled forsome years to keep a sufficient sum on current account at his bankersto make up their deficits, found that the provision was unnecessary:the young people were prospering. It is true that there was not quitefair play between them and their competitors in trade. Their week-endsin the country cost them nothing, and saved them the price of theirSunday dinners; for the motor car was the Colonel’s; and he and Higginspaid the hotel bills. Mr. F. Hill, florist and greengrocer (they soondiscovered that there was money in asparagus; and asparagus led toother vegetables), had an air which stamped the business as classy; andin private life he was still Frederick Eynsford Hill, Esquire. Not thatthere was any swank about him: nobody but Eliza knew that he had beenchristened Frederick Challoner. Eliza herself swanked like anything.That is all. That is how it has turned out. It is astonishing how muchEliza still manages to meddle in the housekeeping at Wimpole Street inspite of the shop and her own family. And it is notable that though shenever nags her husband, and frankly loves the Colonel as if she werehis favorite daughter, she has never got out of the habit of naggingHiggins that was established on the fatal night when she won his betfor him. She snaps his head off on the faintest provocation, or onnone. He no longer dares to tease her by assuming an abysmalinferiority of Freddy’s mind to his own. He storms and bullies andderides; but she stands up to him so ruthlessly that the Colonel has toask her from time to time to be kinder to Higgins; and it is the onlyrequest of his that brings a mulish expression into her face. Nothingbut some emergency or calamity great enough to break down all likes anddislikes, and throw them both back on their common humanity—and maythey be spared any such trial!—will ever alter this. She knows thatHiggins does not need her, just as her father did not need her. Thevery scrupulousness with which he told her that day that he had becomeused to having her there, and dependent on her for all sorts of littleservices, and that he should miss her if she went away (it would neverhave occurred to Freddy or the Colonel to say anything of the sort)deepens her inner certainty that she is “no more to him than themslippers”, yet she has a sense, too, that his indifference is deeperthan the infatuation of commoner souls. She is immensely interested inhim. She has even secret mischievous moments in which she wishes shecould get him alone, on a desert island, away from all ties and withnobody else in the world to consider, and just drag him off hispedestal and see him making love like any common man. We all haveprivate imaginations of that sort. But when it comes to business, tothe life that she really leads as distinguished from the life of dreamsand fancies, she likes Freddy and she likes the Colonel; and she doesnot like Higgins and Mr. Doolittle. Galatea never does quite likePygmalion: his relation to her is too godlike to be altogetheragreeable.*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PYGMALION ******** This file should be named 3825-0.txt or 3825-0.zip *****This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:    https://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/2/3825/Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions willbe renamed.Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in theUnited States without permission and without paying copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use partof this license, apply to copying and distributing ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tmconcept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything forcopies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creationof derivative works, reports, performances and research. ProjectGutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you maydo practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protectedby U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademarklicense, especially commercial redistribution.START: FULL LICENSETHE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the FullProject Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online atwww.gutenberg.org/license.Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from theperson or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph1.E.8.1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“theFoundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promotingfree access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tmworks in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License whenyou share it without charge with others.1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of any work in anycountry other than the United States.1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any workon which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which thephrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, copied or distributed:  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where  you are located before using this eBook.1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work isderived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tmtrademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all worksposted with the permission of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tmLicense terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg-tm License.1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a formatother than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the officialversion posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “PlainVanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic worksprovided that:* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg  Literary Archive Foundation.”* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies  you in writing (or by email) within 30 days of receipt that s/he  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm  works.* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of  receipt of the work.* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager ofthe Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the ProjectGutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, maycontain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Rightof Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further opportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void theremaining provisions.1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works inaccordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tmProject Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donationsfrom people in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection willremain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page atwww.gutenberg.orgSection 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive FoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s websiteand official page at www.gutenberg.org/contactSection 4. Information about Donations to the Project GutenbergLiterary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive withoutwidespread public support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particularstate visit www.gutenberg.org/donateWhile we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donateSection 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic worksProfessor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the ProjectGutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paperedition.Most people start at our website which has the main PG searchfacility: www.gutenberg.orgThis website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.