URL: https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/1727/pg1727.txt
Homer
The Odyssey



﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Odyssey, by HomerThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States andmost other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictionswhatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the termsof the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online atwww.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, youwill have to check the laws of the country where you are located beforeusing this eBook.Title: The OdysseyAuthor: HomerTranslator: Samuel ButlerRelease Date: April, 1999 [eBook #1727][Most recently updated: January 4, 2022]Language: EnglishProduced by: Jim Tinsley and David Widger*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ODYSSEY ***[Illustration]The Odysseyby Homerrendered into English prose for the use of those who cannot read theoriginalContents PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION THE ODYSSEY BOOK I. BOOK II. BOOK III. BOOK IV. BOOK V. BOOK VI. BOOK VII. BOOK VIII. BOOK IX. BOOK X. BOOK XI. BOOK XII. BOOK XIII. BOOK XIV. BOOK XV. BOOK XVI. BOOK XVII. BOOK XVIII. BOOK XIX. BOOK XX. BOOK XXI. BOOK XXII. BOOK XXIII. BOOK XXIV. FOOTNOTES:AL PROFESSORECAV. BIAGIO INGROIA,PREZIOSO ALLEATOL’AUTORE RICONOSCENTE.PREFACE TO FIRST EDITIONThis translation is intended to supplement a work entitled “TheAuthoress of the Odyssey”, which I published in 1897. I could not givethe whole “Odyssey” in that book without making it unwieldy, Itherefore epitomised my translation, which was already completed andwhich I now publish in full.I shall not here argue the two main points dealt with in the work justmentioned; I have nothing either to add to, or to withdraw from, what Ihave there written. The points in question are:(1) that the “Odyssey” was written entirely at, and drawn entirelyfrom, the place now called Trapani on the West Coast of Sicily, alikeas regards the Phaeacian and the Ithaca scenes; while the voyages ofUlysses, when once he is within easy reach of Sicily, solve themselvesinto a periplus of the island, practically from Trapani back toTrapani, via the Lipari islands, the Straits of Messina, and the islandof Pantellaria.(2) That the poem was entirely written by a very young woman, who livedat the place now called Trapani, and introduced herself into her workunder the name of Nausicaa.The main arguments on which I base the first of these somewhatstartling contentions, have been prominently and repeatedly before theEnglish and Italian public ever since they appeared (without rejoinder)in the “Athenaeum” for January 30 and February 20, 1892. Bothcontentions were urged (also without rejoinder) in the Johnian “Eagle”for the Lent and October terms of the same year. Nothing to which Ishould reply has reached me from any quarter, and knowing how anxiouslyI have endeavoured to learn the existence of any flaws in my argument,I begin to feel some confidence that, did such flaws exist, I shouldhave heard, at any rate about some of them, before now. Without,therefore, for a moment pretending to think that scholars generallyacquiesce in my conclusions, I shall act as thinking them little likelyso to gainsay me as that it will be incumbent upon me to reply, andshall confine myself to translating the “Odyssey” for English readers,with such notes as I think will be found useful. Among these I wouldespecially call attention to one on xxii. 465-473 which Lord Grimthorpehas kindly allowed me to make public.I have repeated several of the illustrations used in “The Authoress ofthe Odyssey”, and have added two which I hope may bring the outer courtof Ulysses’ house more vividly before the reader. I should like toexplain that the presence of a man and a dog in one illustration isaccidental, and was not observed by me till I developed the negative.In an appendix I have also reprinted the paragraphs explanatory of theplan of Ulysses’ house, together with the plan itself. The reader isrecommended to study this plan with some attention.In the preface to my translation of the “Iliad” I have given my viewsas to the main principles by which a translator should be guided, andneed not repeat them here, beyond pointing out that the initial libertyof translating poetry into prose involves the continual taking of moreor less liberty throughout the translation; for much that is right inpoetry is wrong in prose, and the exigencies of readable prose are thefirst things to be considered in a prose translation. That the reader,however, may see how far I have departed from strict construe, I willprint here Messrs. Butcher and Lang’s translation of the sixty lines orso of the “Odyssey.” Their translation runs:Tell me, Muse, of that man, so ready at need, who wandered far andwide, after he had sacked the sacred citadel of Troy, and many were themen whose towns he saw and whose mind he learnt, yea, and many the woeshe suffered in his heart on the deep, striving to win his own life andthe return of his company. Nay, but even so he saved not his company,though he desired it sore. For through the blindness of their ownhearts they perished, fools, who devoured the oxen of Helios Hyperion:but the god took from them their day of returning. Of these things,goddess, daughter of Zeus, whencesoever thou hast heard thereof,declare thou even unto us.    Now all the rest, as many as fled from sheer destruction, were at    home, and had escaped both war and sea, but Odysseus only, craving    for his wife and for his homeward path, the lady nymph Calypso    held, that fair goddess, in her hollow caves, longing to have him    for her lord. But when now the year had come in the courses of the    seasons, wherein the gods had ordained that he should return home    to Ithaca, not even there was he quit of labours, not even among    his own; but all the gods had pity on him save Poseidon, who raged    continually against godlike Odysseus, till he came to his own    country. Howbeit Poseidon had now departed for the distant    Ethiopians, the Ethiopians that are sundered in twain, the    uttermost of men, abiding some where Hyperion sinks and some where    he rises. There he looked to receive his hecatomb of bulls and    rams, there he made merry sitting at the feast, but the other gods    were gathered in the halls of Olympian Zeus. Then among them the    father of men and gods began to speak, for he bethought him in his    heart of noble Aegisthus, whom the son of Agamemnon, far-famed    Orestes, slew. Thinking upon him he spake out among the Immortals:    ‘Lo you now, how vainly mortal men do blame the gods! For of us    they say comes evil, whereas they even of themselves, through the    blindness of their own hearts, have sorrows beyond that which is    ordained. Even as of late Aegisthus, beyond that which was    ordained, took to him the wedded wife of the son of Atreus, and    killed her lord on his return, and that with sheer doom before his    eyes, since we had warned him by the embassy of Hermes the    keen-sighted, the slayer of Argos, that he should neither kill the    man, nor woo his wife. For the son of Atreus shall be avenged at    the hand of Orestes, so soon as he shall come to man’s estate and    long for his own country. So spake Hermes, yet he prevailed not on    the heart of Aegisthus, for all his good will; but now hath he paid    one price for all.’    And the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, answered him, saying: ‘O father,    our father Cronides, throned in the highest; that man assuredly    lies in a death that is his due; so perish likewise all who work    such deeds! But my heart is rent for wise Odysseus, the hapless    one, who far from his friends this long while suffereth affliction    in a sea-girt isle, where is the navel of the sea, a woodland isle,    and therein a goddess hath her habitation, the daughter of the    wizard Atlas, who knows the depths of every sea, and himself    upholds the tall pillars which keep earth and sky asunder. His    daughter it is that holds the hapless man in sorrow: and ever with    soft and guileful tales she is wooing him to forgetfulness of    Ithaca. But Odysseus yearning to see if it were but the smoke leap    upwards from his own land, hath a desire to die. As for thee, thine    heart regardeth it not at all, Olympian! What! Did not Odysseus by    the ships of the Argives make thee free offering of sacrifice in    the wide Trojan land? Wherefore wast thou then so wroth with him, O    Zeus?’The “Odyssey” (as every one knows) abounds in passages borrowed fromthe “Iliad”; I had wished to print these in a slightly different type,with marginal references to the “Iliad,” and had marked them to thisend in my MS. I found, however, that the translation would be thushopelessly scholasticised, and abandoned my intention. I wouldnevertheless urge on those who have the management of our Universitypresses, that they would render a great service to students if theywould publish a Greek text of the “Odyssey” with the Iliadic passagesprinted in a different type, and with marginal references. I have giventhe British Museum a copy of the “Odyssey” with the Iliadic passagesunderlined and referred to in MS.; I have also given an “Iliad” markedwith all the Odyssean passages, and their references; but copies ofboth the “Iliad” and “Odyssey” so marked ought to be within easy reachof all students.Any one who at the present day discusses the questions that have arisenround the “Iliad” since Wolf’s time, without keeping it well before hisreader’s mind that the “Odyssey” was demonstrably written from onesingle neighbourhood, and hence (even though nothing else pointed tothis conclusion) presumably by one person only—that it was writtencertainly before 750, and in all probability before 1000 B.C.—that thewriter of this very early poem was demonstrably familiar with the“Iliad” as we now have it, borrowing as freely from those books whosegenuineness has been most impugned, as from those which are admitted tobe by Homer—any one who fails to keep these points before his readers,is hardly dealing equitably by them. Any one on the other hand, whowill mark his “Iliad” and his “Odyssey” from the copies in the BritishMuseum above referred to, and who will draw the only inference thatcommon sense can draw from the presence of so many identical passagesin both poems, will, I believe, find no difficulty in assigning theirproper value to a large number of books here and on the Continent thatat present enjoy considerable reputations. Furthermore, and thisperhaps is an advantage better worth securing, he will find that manypuzzles of the “Odyssey” cease to puzzle him on the discovery that theyarise from over-saturation with the “Iliad.”Other difficulties will also disappear as soon as the development ofthe poem in the writer’s mind is understood. I have dealt with this atsome length in pp. 251-261 of “The Authoress of the Odyssey”. Briefly,the “Odyssey” consists of two distinct poems: (1) The Return ofUlysses, which alone the Muse is asked to sing in the opening lines ofthe poem. This poem includes the Phaeacian episode, and the account ofUlysses’ adventures as told by himself in Books ix.-xii. It consists oflines 1-79 (roughly) of Book i., of line 28 of Book v., and thencewithout intermission to the middle of line 187 of Book xiii., at whichpoint the original scheme was abandoned.(2) The story of Penelope and the suitors, with the episode ofTelemachus’ voyage to Pylos. This poem begins with line 80 (roughly) ofBook i., is continued to the end of Book iv., and not resumed tillUlysses wakes in the middle of line 187, Book xiii., from whence itcontinues to the end of Book xxiv.In “The Authoress of the Odyssey”, I wrote:the introduction of lines xi., 115-137 and of line ix., 535, with thewriting a new council of the gods at the beginning of Book v., to takethe place of the one that was removed to Book i., 1-79, were the onlythings that were done to give even a semblance of unity to the oldscheme and the new, and to conceal the fact that the Muse, after beingasked to sing of one subject, spend two-thirds of her time in singing avery different one, with a climax for which no-one has asked her. Forroughly the Return occupies eight Books, and Penelope and the Suitorssixteen.I believe this to be substantially correct.Lastly, to deal with a very unimportant point, I observe that theLeipsic Teubner edition of 894 makes Books ii. and iii. end with acomma. Stops are things of such far more recent date than the“Odyssey,” that there does not seem much use in adhering to the text inso small a matter; still, from a spirit of mere conservatism, I havepreferred to do so. Why [Greek] at the beginnings of Books ii. andviii., and [Greek], at the beginning of Book vii. should have initialcapitals in an edition far too careful to admit a supposition ofinadvertence, when [Greek] at the beginning of Books vi. and xiii., and[Greek] at the beginning of Book xvii. have no initial capitals, Icannot determine. No other Books of the “Odyssey” have initial capitalsexcept the three mentioned unless the first word of the Book is aproper name.S. BUTLER._July_ 25, 1900.PREFACE TO SECOND EDITIONButler’s Translation of the “Odyssey” appeared originally in 1900, andThe Authoress of the Odyssey in 1897. In the preface to the new editionof “The Authoress”, which is published simultaneously with this newedition of the Translation, I have given some account of the genesis ofthe two books.The size of the original page has been reduced so as to make both booksuniform with Butler’s other works; and, fortunately, it has beenpossible, by using a smaller type, to get the same number of words intoeach page, so that the references remain good, and, with the exceptionof a few minor alterations and rearrangements now to be enumerated sofar as they affect the Translation, the new editions are faithfulreprints of the original editions, with misprints and obvious errorscorrected—no attempt having been made to edit them or to bring them upto date.(a) The Index has been revised.(b) Owing to the reduction in the size of the page it has beennecessary to shorten some of the headlines, and here advantage has beentaken of various corrections of and additions to the headlines andshoulder-notes made by Butler in his own copies of the two books.(c) For the most part each of the illustrations now occupies a page,whereas in the original editions they generally appeared two on thepage. It has been necessary to reduce the plan of the House of Ulysses.On page 153 of “The Authoress” Butler says: “No great poet wouldcompare his hero to a paunch full of blood and fat, cooking before thefire (xx, 24-28).” This passage is not given in the abridged Story ofthe “Odyssey” at the beginning of the book, but in the Translation itoccurs in these words:“Thus he chided with his heart, and checked it into endurance, but hetossed about as one who turns a paunch full of blood and fat in frontof a hot fire, doing it first on one side then on the other, that hemay get it cooked as soon as possible; even so did he turn himselfabout from side to side, thinking all the time how, single-handed as hewas, he should contrive to kill so large a body of men as the wickedsuitors.”It looks as though in the interval between the publication of “TheAuthoress” (1897) and of the Translation (1900) Butler had changed hismind; for in the first case the comparison is between Ulysses and apaunch full, etc., and in the second it is between Ulysses and a manwho turns a paunch full, etc. The second comparison is perhaps onewhich a great poet might make.In seeing the works through the press I have had the invaluableassistance of Mr. A. T. Bartholomew of the University Library,Cambridge, and of Mr. Donald S. Robertson, Fellow of Trinity College,Cambridge. To both these friends I give my most cordial thanks for thecare and skill exercised by them. Mr. Robertson has found time for thelabour of checking and correcting all the quotations from andreferences to the “Iliad” and “Odyssey,” and I believe that it couldnot have been better performed. It was, I know, a pleasure for him; andit would have been a pleasure also for Butler if he could have knownthat his work was being shepherded by the son of his old friend, Mr. H.R. Robertson, who more than half a century ago was a fellow-studentwith him at Cary’s School of Art in Streatham Street, Bloomsbury.HENRY FESTING JONES. 120 MAIDA VALE, W.9.4th _December_, 1921.THE ODYSSEYBOOK ITHE GODS IN COUNCIL—MINERVA’S VISIT TO ITHACA—THE CHALLENGE FROMTELEMACHUS TO THE SUITORS.Tell me, O Muse, of that ingenious hero who travelled far and wideafter he had sacked the famous town of Troy. Many cities did he visit,and many were the nations with whose manners and customs he wasacquainted; moreover he suffered much by sea while trying to save hisown life and bring his men safely home; but do what he might he couldnot save his men, for they perished through their own sheer folly ineating the cattle of the Sun-god Hyperion; so the god prevented themfrom ever reaching home. Tell me, too, about all these things, ohdaughter of Jove, from whatsoever source you may know them.So now all who escaped death in battle or by shipwreck had got safelyhome except Ulysses, and he, though he was longing to return to hiswife and country, was detained by the goddess Calypso, who had got himinto a large cave and wanted to marry him. But as years went by, therecame a time when the gods settled that he should go back to Ithaca;even then, however, when he was among his own people, his troubles werenot yet over; nevertheless all the gods had now begun to pity himexcept Neptune, who still persecuted him without ceasing and would notlet him get home.Now Neptune had gone off to the Ethiopians, who are at the world’s end,and lie in two halves, the one looking West and the other East.1 He hadgone there to accept a hecatomb of sheep and oxen, and was enjoyinghimself at his festival; but the other gods met in the house ofOlympian Jove, and the sire of gods and men spoke first. At that momenthe was thinking of Aegisthus, who had been killed by Agamemnon’s sonOrestes; so he said to the other gods:“See now, how men lay blame upon us gods for what is after all nothingbut their own folly. Look at Aegisthus; he must needs make love toAgamemnon’s wife unrighteously and then kill Agamemnon, though he knewit would be the death of him; for I sent Mercury to warn him not to doeither of these things, inasmuch as Orestes would be sure to take hisrevenge when he grew up and wanted to return home. Mercury told himthis in all good will but he would not listen, and now he has paid foreverything in full.”Then Minerva said, “Father, son of Saturn, King of kings, it servedAegisthus right, and so it would any one else who does as he did; butAegisthus is neither here nor there; it is for Ulysses that my heartbleeds, when I think of his sufferings in that lonely sea-girt island,far away, poor man, from all his friends. It is an island covered withforest, in the very middle of the sea, and a goddess lives there,daughter of the magician Atlas, who looks after the bottom of theocean, and carries the great columns that keep heaven and earthasunder. This daughter of Atlas has got hold of poor unhappy Ulysses,and keeps trying by every kind of blandishment to make him forget hishome, so that he is tired of life, and thinks of nothing but how he mayonce more see the smoke of his own chimneys. You, sir, take no heed ofthis, and yet when Ulysses was before Troy did he not propitiate youwith many a burnt sacrifice? Why then should you keep on being so angrywith him?”And Jove said, “My child, what are you talking about? How can I forgetUlysses than whom there is no more capable man on earth, nor moreliberal in his offerings to the immortal gods that live in heaven? Bearin mind, however, that Neptune is still furious with Ulysses for havingblinded an eye of Polyphemus king of the Cyclopes. Polyphemus is son toNeptune by the nymph Thoosa, daughter to the sea-king Phorcys;therefore though he will not kill Ulysses outright, he torments him bypreventing him from getting home. Still, let us lay our heads togetherand see how we can help him to return; Neptune will then be pacified,for if we are all of a mind he can hardly stand out against us.”And Minerva said, “Father, son of Saturn, King of kings, if, then, thegods now mean that Ulysses should get home, we should first sendMercury to the Ogygian island to tell Calypso that we have made up ourminds and that he is to return. In the meantime I will go to Ithaca, toput heart into Ulysses’ son Telemachus; I will embolden him to call theAchaeans in assembly, and speak out to the suitors of his motherPenelope, who persist in eating up any number of his sheep and oxen; Iwill also conduct him to Sparta and to Pylos, to see if he can hearanything about the return of his dear father—for this will make peoplespeak well of him.”So saying she bound on her glittering golden sandals, imperishable,with which she can fly like the wind over land or sea; she grasped theredoubtable bronze-shod spear, so stout and sturdy and strong,wherewith she quells the ranks of heroes who have displeased her, anddown she darted from the topmost summits of Olympus, whereon forthwithshe was in Ithaca, at the gateway of Ulysses’ house, disguised as avisitor, Mentes, chief of the Taphians, and she held a bronze spear inher hand. There she found the lordly suitors seated on hides of theoxen which they had killed and eaten, and playing draughts in front ofthe house. Men-servants and pages were bustling about to wait uponthem, some mixing wine with water in the mixing-bowls, some cleaningdown the tables with wet sponges and laying them out again, and somecutting up great quantities of meat.Telemachus saw her long before any one else did. He was sitting moodilyamong the suitors thinking about his brave father, and how he wouldsend them flying out of the house, if he were to come to his own againand be honoured as in days gone by. Thus brooding as he sat among them,he caught sight of Minerva and went straight to the gate, for he wasvexed that a stranger should be kept waiting for admittance. He tookher right hand in his own, and bade her give him her spear. “Welcome,”said he, “to our house, and when you have partaken of food you shalltell us what you have come for.”He led the way as he spoke, and Minerva followed him. When they werewithin he took her spear and set it in the spear-stand against a strongbearing-post along with the many other spears of his unhappy father,and he conducted her to a richly decorated seat under which he threw acloth of damask. There was a footstool also for her feet,2 and he setanother seat near her for himself, away from the suitors, that shemight not be annoyed while eating by their noise and insolence, andthat he might ask her more freely about his father.A maid servant then brought them water in a beautiful golden ewer andpoured it into a silver basin for them to wash their hands, and shedrew a clean table beside them. An upper servant brought them bread,and offered them many good things of what there was in the house, thecarver fetched them plates of all manner of meats and set cups of goldby their side, and a manservant brought them wine and poured it out forthem.Then the suitors came in and took their places on the benches andseats.3 Forthwith men servants poured water over their hands, maidswent round with the bread-baskets, pages filled the mixing-bowls withwine and water, and they laid their hands upon the good things thatwere before them. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink theywanted music and dancing, which are the crowning embellishments of abanquet, so a servant brought a lyre to Phemius, whom they compelledperforce to sing to them. As soon as he touched his lyre and began tosing Telemachus spoke low to Minerva, with his head close to hers thatno man might hear.“I hope, sir,” said he, “that you will not be offended with what I amgoing to say. Singing comes cheap to those who do not pay for it, andall this is done at the cost of one whose bones lie rotting in somewilderness or grinding to powder in the surf. If these men were to seemy father come back to Ithaca they would pray for longer legs ratherthan a longer purse, for money would not serve them; but he, alas, hasfallen on an ill fate, and even when people do sometimes say that he iscoming, we no longer heed them; we shall never see him again. And now,sir, tell me and tell me true, who you are and where you come from.Tell me of your town and parents, what manner of ship you came in, howyour crew brought you to Ithaca, and of what nation they declaredthemselves to be—for you cannot have come by land. Tell me also truly,for I want to know, are you a stranger to this house, or have you beenhere in my father’s time? In the old days we had many visitors for myfather went about much himself.”And Minerva answered, “I will tell you truly and particularly all aboutit. I am Mentes, son of Anchialus, and I am King of the Taphians. Ihave come here with my ship and crew, on a voyage to men of a foreigntongue being bound for Temesa4 with a cargo of iron, and I shall bringback copper. As for my ship, it lies over yonder off the open countryaway from the town, in the harbour Rheithron5 under the wooded mountainNeritum.6 Our fathers were friends before us, as old Laertes will tellyou, if you will go and ask him. They say, however, that he never comesto town now, and lives by himself in the country, faring hardly, withan old woman to look after him and get his dinner for him, when hecomes in tired from pottering about his vineyard. They told me yourfather was at home again, and that was why I came, but it seems thegods are still keeping him back, for he is not dead yet not on themainland. It is more likely he is on some sea-girt island in mid ocean,or a prisoner among savages who are detaining him against his will. Iam no prophet, and know very little about omens, but I speak as it isborne in upon me from heaven, and assure you that he will not be awaymuch longer; for he is a man of such resource that even though he werein chains of iron he would find some means of getting home again. Buttell me, and tell me true, can Ulysses really have such a fine lookingfellow for a son? You are indeed wonderfully like him about the headand eyes, for we were close friends before he set sail for Troy wherethe flower of all the Argives went also. Since that time we have nevereither of us seen the other.”“My mother,” answered Telemachus, “tells me I am son to Ulysses, but itis a wise child that knows his own father. Would that I were son to onewho had grown old upon his own estates, for, since you ask me, there isno more ill-starred man under heaven than he who they tell me is myfather.”And Minerva said, “There is no fear of your race dying out yet, whilePenelope has such a fine son as you are. But tell me, and tell me true,what is the meaning of all this feasting, and who are these people?What is it all about? Have you some banquet, or is there a wedding inthe family—for no one seems to be bringing any provisions of his own?And the guests—how atrociously they are behaving; what riot they makeover the whole house; it is enough to disgust any respectable personwho comes near them.”“Sir,” said Telemachus, “as regards your question, so long as my fatherwas here it was well with us and with the house, but the gods in theirdispleasure have willed it otherwise, and have hidden him away moreclosely than mortal man was ever yet hidden. I could have borne itbetter even though he were dead, if he had fallen with his men beforeTroy, or had died with friends around him when the days of his fightingwere done; for then the Achaeans would have built a mound over hisashes, and I should myself have been heir to his renown; but now thestorm-winds have spirited him away we know not whither; he is gonewithout leaving so much as a trace behind him, and I inherit nothingbut dismay. Nor does the matter end simply with grief for the loss ofmy father; heaven has laid sorrows upon me of yet another kind; for thechiefs from all our islands, Dulichium, Same, and the woodland islandof Zacynthus, as also all the principal men of Ithaca itself, areeating up my house under the pretext of paying their court to mymother, who will neither point blank say that she will not marry,7 noryet bring matters to an end; so they are making havoc of my estate, andbefore long will do so also with myself.”“Is that so?” exclaimed Minerva, “then you do indeed want Ulysses homeagain. Give him his helmet, shield, and a couple of lances, and if heis the man he was when I first knew him in our house, drinking andmaking merry, he would soon lay his hands about these rascally suitors,were he to stand once more upon his own threshold. He was then comingfrom Ephyra, where he had been to beg poison for his arrows from Ilus,son of Mermerus. Ilus feared the ever-living gods and would not givehim any, but my father let him have some, for he was very fond of him.If Ulysses is the man he then was these suitors will have a shortshrift and a sorry wedding.“But there! It rests with heaven to determine whether he is to return,and take his revenge in his own house or no; I would, however, urge youto set about trying to get rid of these suitors at once. Take myadvice, call the Achaean heroes in assembly to-morrow morning—lay yourcase before them, and call heaven to bear you witness. Bid the suitorstake themselves off, each to his own place, and if your mother’s mindis set on marrying again, let her go back to her father, who will findher a husband and provide her with all the marriage gifts that so deara daughter may expect. As for yourself, let me prevail upon you to takethe best ship you can get, with a crew of twenty men, and go in questof your father who has so long been missing. Some one may tell yousomething, or (and people often hear things in this way) someheaven-sent message may direct you. First go to Pylos and ask Nestor;thence go on to Sparta and visit Menelaus, for he got home last of allthe Achaeans; if you hear that your father is alive and on his wayhome, you can put up with the waste these suitors will make for yetanother twelve months. If on the other hand you hear of his death, comehome at once, celebrate his funeral rites with all due pomp, build abarrow to his memory, and make your mother marry again. Then, havingdone all this, think it well over in your mind how, by fair means orfoul, you may kill these suitors in your own house. You are too old toplead infancy any longer; have you not heard how people are singingOrestes’ praises for having killed his father’s murderer Aegisthus? Youare a fine, smart looking fellow; show your mettle, then, and makeyourself a name in story. Now, however, I must go back to my ship andto my crew, who will be impatient if I keep them waiting longer; thinkthe matter over for yourself, and remember what I have said to you.”“Sir,” answered Telemachus, “it has been very kind of you to talk to mein this way, as though I were your own son, and I will do all you tellme; I know you want to be getting on with your voyage, but stay alittle longer till you have taken a bath and refreshed yourself. I willthen give you a present, and you shall go on your way rejoicing; I willgive you one of great beauty and value—a keepsake such as only dearfriends give to one another.”Minerva answered, “Do not try to keep me, for I would be on my way atonce. As for any present you may be disposed to make me, keep it till Icome again, and I will take it home with me. You shall give me a verygood one, and I will give you one of no less value in return.”With these words she flew away like a bird into the air, but she hadgiven Telemachus courage, and had made him think more than ever abouthis father. He felt the change, wondered at it, and knew that thestranger had been a god, so he went straight to where the suitors weresitting.Phemius was still singing, and his hearers sat rapt in silence as hetold the sad tale of the return from Troy, and the ills Minerva hadlaid upon the Achaeans. Penelope, daughter of Icarius, heard his songfrom her room upstairs, and came down by the great staircase, notalone, but attended by two of her handmaids. When she reached thesuitors she stood by one of the bearing posts that supported the roofof the cloisters8 with a staid maiden on either side of her. She held aveil, moreover, before her face, and was weeping bitterly.“Phemius,” she cried, “you know many another feat of gods and heroes,such as poets love to celebrate. Sing the suitors some one of these,and let them drink their wine in silence, but cease this sad tale, forit breaks my sorrowful heart, and reminds me of my lost husband whom Imourn ever without ceasing, and whose name was great over all Hellasand middle Argos.”9“Mother,” answered Telemachus, “let the bard sing what he has a mindto; bards do not make the ills they sing of; it is Jove, not they, whomakes them, and who sends weal or woe upon mankind according to his owngood pleasure. This fellow means no harm by singing the ill-fatedreturn of the Danaans, for people always applaud the latest songs mostwarmly. Make up your mind to it and bear it; Ulysses is not the onlyman who never came back from Troy, but many another went down as wellas he. Go, then, within the house and busy yourself with your dailyduties, your loom, your distaff, and the ordering of your servants; forspeech is man’s matter, and mine above all others 10—for it is I who ammaster here.”She went wondering back into the house, and laid her son’s saying inher heart. Then, going upstairs with her handmaids into her room, shemourned her dear husband till Minerva shed sweet sleep over her eyes.But the suitors were clamorous throughout the covered cloisters11, andprayed each one that he might be her bed fellow.Then Telemachus spoke, “Shameless,” he cried, “and insolent suitors,let us feast at our pleasure now, and let there be no brawling, for itis a rare thing to hear a man with such a divine voice as Phemius has;but in the morning meet me in full assembly that I may give you formalnotice to depart, and feast at one another’s houses, turn and turnabout, at your own cost. If on the other hand you choose to persist inspunging upon one man, heaven help me, but Jove shall reckon with youin full, and when you fall in my father’s house there shall be no manto avenge you.”The suitors bit their lips as they heard him, and marvelled at theboldness of his speech. Then, Antinous, son of Eupeithes, said, “Thegods seem to have given you lessons in bluster and tall talking; mayJove never grant you to be chief in Ithaca as your father was beforeyou.”Telemachus answered, “Antinous, do not chide with me, but, god willing,I will be chief too if I can. Is this the worst fate you can think offor me? It is no bad thing to be a chief, for it brings both riches andhonour. Still, now that Ulysses is dead there are many great men inIthaca both old and young, and some other may take the lead among them;nevertheless I will be chief in my own house, and will rule those whomUlysses has won for me.”Then Eurymachus, son of Polybus, answered, “It rests with heaven todecide who shall be chief among us, but you shall be master in your ownhouse and over your own possessions; no one while there is a man inIthaca shall do you violence nor rob you. And now, my good fellow, Iwant to know about this stranger. What country does he come from? Ofwhat family is he, and where is his estate? Has he brought you newsabout the return of your father, or was he on business of his own? Heseemed a well to do man, but he hurried off so suddenly that he wasgone in a moment before we could get to know him.”“My father is dead and gone,” answered Telemachus, “and even if somerumour reaches me I put no more faith in it now. My mother does indeedsometimes send for a soothsayer and question him, but I give hisprophecyings no heed. As for the stranger, he was Mentes, son ofAnchialus, chief of the Taphians, an old friend of my father’s.” But inhis heart he knew that it had been the goddess.The suitors then returned to their singing and dancing until theevening; but when night fell upon their pleasuring they went home tobed each in his own abode.12 Telemachus’s room was high up in a tower13that looked on to the outer court; hither, then, he hied, brooding andfull of thought. A good old woman, Euryclea, daughter of Ops, the sonof Pisenor, went before him with a couple of blazing torches. Laerteshad bought her with his own money when she was quite young; he gave theworth of twenty oxen for her, and shewed as much respect to her in hishousehold as he did to his own wedded wife, but he did not take her tohis bed for he feared his wife’s resentment.14 She it was who nowlighted Telemachus to his room, and she loved him better than any ofthe other women in the house did, for she had nursed him when he was ababy. He opened the door of his bed room and sat down upon the bed; ashe took off his shirt15 he gave it to the good old woman, who folded ittidily up, and hung it for him over a peg by his bed side, after whichshe went out, pulled the door to by a silver catch, and drew the bolthome by means of the strap.16 But Telemachus as he lay covered with awoollen fleece kept thinking all night through of his intended voyageand of the counsel that Minerva had given him.BOOK IIASSEMBLY OF THE PEOPLE OF ITHACA—SPEECHES OF TELEMACHUS AND OF THESUITORS—TELEMACHUS MAKES HIS PREPARATIONS AND STARTS FOR PYLOS WITHMINERVA DISGUISED AS MENTOR.Now when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared Telemachusrose and dressed himself. He bound his sandals on to his comely feet,girded his sword about his shoulder, and left his room looking like animmortal god. He at once sent the criers round to call the people inassembly, so they called them and the people gathered thereon; then,when they were got together, he went to the place of assembly spear inhand—not alone, for his two hounds went with him. Minerva endowed himwith a presence of such divine comeliness that all marvelled at him ashe went by, and when he took his place in his father’s seat even theoldest councillors made way for him.Aegyptius, a man bent double with age, and of infinite experience, wasthe first to speak. His son Antiphus had gone with Ulysses to Ilius,land of noble steeds, but the savage Cyclops had killed him when theywere all shut up in the cave, and had cooked his last dinner for him.17He had three sons left, of whom two still worked on their father’sland, while the third, Eurynomus, was one of the suitors; neverthelesstheir father could not get over the loss of Antiphus, and was stillweeping for him when he began his speech.“Men of Ithaca,” he said, “hear my words. From the day Ulysses left usthere has been no meeting of our councillors until now; who then can itbe, whether old or young, that finds it so necessary to convene us? Hashe got wind of some host approaching, and does he wish to warn us, orwould he speak upon some other matter of public moment? I am sure he isan excellent person, and I hope Jove will grant him his heart’sdesire.”Telemachus took this speech as of good omen and rose at once, for hewas bursting with what he had to say. He stood in the middle of theassembly and the good herald Pisenor brought him his staff. Then,turning to Aegyptius, “Sir,” said he, “it is I, as you will shortlylearn, who have convened you, for it is I who am the most aggrieved. Ihave not got wind of any host approaching about which I would warn you,nor is there any matter of public moment on which I would speak. Mygrievance is purely personal, and turns on two great misfortunes whichhave fallen upon my house. The first of these is the loss of myexcellent father, who was chief among all you here present, and waslike a father to every one of you; the second is much more serious, andere long will be the utter ruin of my estate. The sons of all the chiefmen among you are pestering my mother to marry them against her will.They are afraid to go to her father Icarius, asking him to choose theone he likes best, and to provide marriage gifts for his daughter, butday by day they keep hanging about my father’s house, sacrificing ouroxen, sheep, and fat goats for their banquets, and never giving so muchas a thought to the quantity of wine they drink. No estate can standsuch recklessness; we have now no Ulysses to ward off harm from ourdoors, and I cannot hold my own against them. I shall never all my daysbe as good a man as he was, still I would indeed defend myself if I hadpower to do so, for I cannot stand such treatment any longer; my houseis being disgraced and ruined. Have respect, therefore, to your ownconsciences and to public opinion. Fear, too, the wrath of heaven, lestthe gods should be displeased and turn upon you. I pray you by Jove andThemis, who is the beginning and the end of councils, [do not] holdback, my friends, and leave me singlehanded18—unless it be that mybrave father Ulysses did some wrong to the Achaeans which you would nowavenge on me, by aiding and abetting these suitors. Moreover, if I amto be eaten out of house and home at all, I had rather you did theeating yourselves, for I could then take action against you to somepurpose, and serve you with notices from house to house till I got paidin full, whereas now I have no remedy.”19With this Telemachus dashed his staff to the ground and burst intotears. Every one was very sorry for him, but they all sat still and noone ventured to make him an angry answer, save only Antinous, who spokethus:“Telemachus, insolent braggart that you are, how dare you try to throwthe blame upon us suitors? It is your mother’s fault not ours, for sheis a very artful woman. This three years past, and close on four, shehad been driving us out of our minds, by encouraging each one of us,and sending him messages without meaning one word of what she says. Andthen there was that other trick she played us. She set up a greattambour frame in her room, and began to work on an enormous piece offine needlework. ‘Sweet hearts,’ said she, ‘Ulysses is indeed dead,still do not press me to marry again immediately, wait—for I would nothave skill in needlework perish unrecorded—till I have completed a pallfor the hero Laertes, to be in readiness against the time when deathshall take him. He is very rich, and the women of the place will talkif he is laid out without a pall.’“This was what she said, and we assented; whereon we could see herworking on her great web all day long, but at night she would unpickthe stitches again by torchlight. She fooled us in this way for threeyears and we never found her out, but as time wore on and she was nowin her fourth year, one of her maids who knew what she was doing toldus, and we caught her in the act of undoing her work, so she had tofinish it whether she would or no. The suitors, therefore, make youthis answer, that both you and the Achaeans may understand—‘Send yourmother away, and bid her marry the man of her own and of her father’schoice’; for I do not know what will happen if she goes on plaguing usmuch longer with the airs she gives herself on the score of theaccomplishments Minerva has taught her, and because she is so clever.We never yet heard of such a woman; we know all about Tyro, Alcmena,Mycene, and the famous women of old, but they were nothing to yourmother any one of them. It was not fair of her to treat us in that way,and as long as she continues in the mind with which heaven has nowendowed her, so long shall we go on eating up your estate; and I do notsee why she should change, for she gets all the honour and glory, andit is you who pay for it, not she. Understand, then, that we will notgo back to our lands, neither here nor elsewhere, till she has made herchoice and married some one or other of us.”Telemachus answered, “Antinous, how can I drive the mother who bore mefrom my father’s house? My father is abroad and we do not know whetherhe is alive or dead. It will be hard on me if I have to pay Icarius thelarge sum which I must give him if I insist on sending his daughterback to him. Not only will he deal rigorously with me, but heaven willalso punish me; for my mother when she leaves the house will call onthe Erinyes to avenge her; besides, it would not be a creditable thingto do, and I will have nothing to say to it. If you choose to takeoffence at this, leave the house and feast elsewhere at one another’shouses at your own cost turn and turn about. If, on the other hand, youelect to persist in spunging upon one man, heaven help me, but Joveshall reckon with you in full, and when you fall in my father’s housethere shall be no man to avenge you.”As he spoke Jove sent two eagles from the top of the mountain, and theyflew on and on with the wind, sailing side by side in their own lordlyflight. When they were right over the middle of the assembly theywheeled and circled about, beating the air with their wings and glaringdeath into the eyes of them that were below; then, fighting fiercelyand tearing at one another, they flew off towards the right over thetown. The people wondered as they saw them, and asked each other whatall this might be; whereon Halitherses, who was the best prophet andreader of omens among them, spoke to them plainly and in all honesty,saying:“Hear me, men of Ithaca, and I speak more particularly to the suitors,for I see mischief brewing for them. Ulysses is not going to be awaymuch longer; indeed he is close at hand to deal out death anddestruction, not on them alone, but on many another of us who live inIthaca. Let us then be wise in time, and put a stop to this wickednessbefore he comes. Let the suitors do so of their own accord; it will bebetter for them, for I am not prophesying without due knowledge;everything has happened to Ulysses as I foretold when the Argives setout for Troy, and he with them. I said that after going through muchhardship and losing all his men he should come home again in thetwentieth year and that no one would know him; and now all this iscoming true.”Eurymachus son of Polybus then said, “Go home, old man, and prophesy toyour own children, or it may be worse for them. I can read these omensmyself much better than you can; birds are always flying about in thesunshine somewhere or other, but they seldom mean anything. Ulysses hasdied in a far country, and it is a pity you are not dead along withhim, instead of prating here about omens and adding fuel to the angerof Telemachus which is fierce enough as it is. I suppose you think hewill give you something for your family, but I tell you—and it shallsurely be—when an old man like you, who should know better, talks ayoung one over till he becomes troublesome, in the first place hisyoung friend will only fare so much the worse—he will take nothing byit, for the suitors will prevent this—and in the next, we will lay aheavier fine, sir, upon yourself than you will at all like paying, forit will bear hardly upon you. As for Telemachus, I warn him in thepresence of you all to send his mother back to her father, who willfind her a husband and provide her with all the marriage gifts so deara daughter may expect. Till then we shall go on harassing him with oursuit; for we fear no man, and care neither for him, with all his finespeeches, nor for any fortune-telling of yours. You may preach as muchas you please, but we shall only hate you the more. We shall go backand continue to eat up Telemachus’s estate without paying him, tillsuch time as his mother leaves off tormenting us by keeping us dayafter day on the tiptoe of expectation, each vying with the other inhis suit for a prize of such rare perfection. Besides we cannot goafter the other women whom we should marry in due course, but for theway in which she treats us.”Then Telemachus said, “Eurymachus, and you other suitors, I shall sayno more, and entreat you no further, for the gods and the people ofIthaca now know my story. Give me, then, a ship and a crew of twentymen to take me hither and thither, and I will go to Sparta and to Pylosin quest of my father who has so long been missing. Some one may tellme something, or (and people often hear things in this way) someheaven-sent message may direct me. If I can hear of him as alive and onhis way home I will put up with the waste you suitors will make for yetanother twelve months. If on the other hand I hear of his death, I willreturn at once, celebrate his funeral rites with all due pomp, build abarrow to his memory, and make my mother marry again.”With these words he sat down, and Mentor20 who had been a friend ofUlysses, and had been left in charge of everything with full authorityover the servants, rose to speak. He, then, plainly and in all honestyaddressed them thus:“Hear me, men of Ithaca, I hope that you may never have a kind andwell-disposed ruler any more, nor one who will govern you equitably; Ihope that all your chiefs henceforward may be cruel and unjust, forthere is not one of you but has forgotten Ulysses, who ruled you asthough he were your father. I am not half so angry with the suitors,for if they choose to do violence in the naughtiness of their hearts,and wager their heads that Ulysses will not return, they can take thehigh hand and eat up his estate, but as for you others I am shocked atthe way in which you all sit still without even trying to stop suchscandalous goings on—which you could do if you chose, for you are manyand they are few.”Leiocritus, son of Evenor, answered him saying, “Mentor, what folly isall this, that you should set the people to stay us? It is a hard thingfor one man to fight with many about his victuals. Even though Ulysseshimself were to set upon us while we are feasting in his house, and dohis best to oust us, his wife, who wants him back so very badly, wouldhave small cause for rejoicing, and his blood would be upon his ownhead if he fought against such great odds. There is no sense in whatyou have been saying. Now, therefore, do you people go about yourbusiness, and let his father’s old friends, Mentor and Halitherses,speed this boy on his journey, if he goes at all—which I do not thinkhe will, for he is more likely to stay where he is till some one comesand tells him something.”On this he broke up the assembly, and every man went back to his ownabode, while the suitors returned to the house of Ulysses.Then Telemachus went all alone by the sea side, washed his hands in thegrey waves, and prayed to Minerva.“Hear me,” he cried, “you god who visited me yesterday, and bade mesail the seas in search of my father who has so long been missing. Iwould obey you, but the Achaeans, and more particularly the wickedsuitors, are hindering me that I cannot do so.”As he thus prayed, Minerva came close up to him in the likeness andwith the voice of Mentor. “Telemachus,” said she, “if you are made ofthe same stuff as your father you will be neither fool nor cowardhenceforward, for Ulysses never broke his word nor left his work halfdone. If, then, you take after him, your voyage will not be fruitless,but unless you have the blood of Ulysses and of Penelope in your veinsI see no likelihood of your succeeding. Sons are seldom as good men astheir fathers; they are generally worse, not better; still, as you arenot going to be either fool or coward henceforward, and are notentirely without some share of your father’s wise discernment, I lookwith hope upon your undertaking. But mind you never make common causewith any of those foolish suitors, for they have neither sense norvirtue, and give no thought to death and to the doom that will shortlyfall on one and all of them, so that they shall perish on the same day.As for your voyage, it shall not be long delayed; your father was suchan old friend of mine that I will find you a ship, and will come withyou myself. Now, however, return home, and go about among the suitors;begin getting provisions ready for your voyage; see everything wellstowed, the wine in jars, and the barley meal, which is the staff oflife, in leathern bags, while I go round the town and beat upvolunteers at once. There are many ships in Ithaca both old and new; Iwill run my eye over them for you and will choose the best; we will gether ready and will put out to sea without delay.”Thus spoke Minerva daughter of Jove, and Telemachus lost no time indoing as the goddess told him. He went moodily home, and found thesuitors flaying goats and singeing pigs in the outer court. Antinouscame up to him at once and laughed as he took his hand in his own,saying, “Telemachus, my fine fire-eater, bear no more ill blood neitherin word nor deed, but eat and drink with us as you used to do. TheAchaeans will find you in everything—a ship and a picked crew toboot—so that you can set sail for Pylos at once and get news of yournoble father.”“Antinous,” answered Telemachus, “I cannot eat in peace, nor takepleasure of any kind with such men as you are. Was it not enough thatyou should waste so much good property of mine while I was yet a boy?Now that I am older and know more about it, I am also stronger, andwhether here among this people, or by going to Pylos, I will do you allthe harm I can. I shall go, and my going will not be in vain—though,thanks to you suitors, I have neither ship nor crew of my own, and mustbe passenger not captain.”As he spoke he snatched his hand from that of Antinous. Meanwhile theothers went on getting dinner ready about the buildings,21 jeering athim tauntingly as they did so.“Telemachus,” said one youngster, “means to be the death of us; Isuppose he thinks he can bring friends to help him from Pylos, or againfrom Sparta, where he seems bent on going. Or will he go to Ephyra aswell, for poison to put in our wine and kill us?”Another said, “Perhaps if Telemachus goes on board ship, he will belike his father and perish far from his friends. In this case we shouldhave plenty to do, for we could then divide up his property amongst us:as for the house we can let his mother and the man who marries her havethat.”This was how they talked. But Telemachus went down into the lofty andspacious store-room where his father’s treasure of gold and bronze layheaped up upon the floor, and where the linen and spare clothes werekept in open chests. Here, too, there was a store of fragrant oliveoil, while casks of old, well-ripened wine, unblended and fit for a godto drink, were ranged against the wall in case Ulysses should come homeagain after all. The room was closed with well-made doors opening inthe middle; moreover the faithful old house-keeper Euryclea, daughterof Ops the son of Pisenor, was in charge of everything both night andday. Telemachus called her to the store-room and said:“Nurse, draw me off some of the best wine you have, after what you arekeeping for my father’s own drinking, in case, poor man, he shouldescape death, and find his way home again after all. Let me have twelvejars, and see that they all have lids; also fill me some well-sewnleathern bags with barley meal—about twenty measures in all. Get thesethings put together at once, and say nothing about it. I will takeeverything away this evening as soon as my mother has gone upstairs forthe night. I am going to Sparta and to Pylos to see if I can hearanything about the return of my dear father.”When Euryclea heard this she began to cry, and spoke fondly to him,saying, “My dear child, what ever can have put such notion as that intoyour head? Where in the world do you want to go to—you, who are the onehope of the house? Your poor father is dead and gone in some foreigncountry nobody knows where, and as soon as your back is turned thesewicked ones here will be scheming to get you put out of the way, andwill share all your possessions among themselves; stay where you areamong your own people, and do not go wandering and worrying your lifeout on the barren ocean.”“Fear not, nurse,” answered Telemachus, “my scheme is not withoutheaven’s sanction; but swear that you will say nothing about all thisto my mother, till I have been away some ten or twelve days, unless shehears of my having gone, and asks you; for I do not want her to spoilher beauty by crying.”The old woman swore most solemnly that she would not, and when she hadcompleted her oath, she began drawing off the wine into jars, andgetting the barley meal into the bags, while Telemachus went back tothe suitors.Then Minerva bethought her of another matter. She took his shape, andwent round the town to each one of the crew, telling them to meet atthe ship by sundown. She went also to Noemon son of Phronius, and askedhim to let her have a ship—which he was very ready to do. When the sunhad set and darkness was over all the land, she got the ship into thewater, put all the tackle on board her that ships generally carry, andstationed her at the end of the harbour. Presently the crew came up,and the goddess spoke encouragingly to each of them.Furthermore she went to the house of Ulysses, and threw the suitorsinto a deep slumber. She caused their drink to fuddle them, and madethem drop their cups from their hands, so that instead of sitting overtheir wine, they went back into the town to sleep, with their eyesheavy and full of drowsiness. Then she took the form and voice ofMentor, and called Telemachus to come outside.“Telemachus,” said she, “the men are on board and at their oars,waiting for you to give your orders, so make haste and let us be off.”On this she led the way, while Telemachus followed in her steps. Whenthey got to the ship they found the crew waiting by the water side, andTelemachus said, “Now my men, help me to get the stores on board; theyare all put together in the cloister, and my mother does not knowanything about it, nor any of the maid servants except one.”With these words he led the way and the others followed after. Whenthey had brought the things as he told them, Telemachus went on board,Minerva going before him and taking her seat in the stern of thevessel, while Telemachus sat beside her. Then the men loosed thehawsers and took their places on the benches. Minerva sent them a fairwind from the West,22 that whistled over the deep blue waves23 whereonTelemachus told them to catch hold of the ropes and hoist sail, andthey did as he told them. They set the mast in its socket in the crossplank, raised it, and made it fast with the forestays; then theyhoisted their white sails aloft with ropes of twisted ox hide. As thesail bellied out with the wind, the ship flew through the deep bluewater, and the foam hissed against her bows as she sped onward. Thenthey made all fast throughout the ship, filled the mixing bowls to thebrim, and made drink offerings to the immortal gods that are fromeverlasting, but more particularly to the grey-eyed daughter of Jove.Thus, then, the ship sped on her way through the watches of the nightfrom dark till dawn.BOOK IIITELEMACHUS VISITS NESTOR AT PYLOS.but as the sun was rising from the fair sea24 into the firmament ofheaven to shed light on mortals and immortals, they reached Pylos thecity of Neleus. Now the people of Pylos were gathered on the sea shoreto offer sacrifice of black bulls to Neptune lord of the Earthquake.There were nine guilds with five hundred men in each, and there werenine bulls to each guild. As they were eating the inward meats25 andburning the thigh bones [on the embers] in the name of Neptune,Telemachus and his crew arrived, furled their sails, brought their shipto anchor, and went ashore.Minerva led the way and Telemachus followed her. Presently she said,“Telemachus, you must not be in the least shy or nervous; you havetaken this voyage to try and find out where your father is buried andhow he came by his end; so go straight up to Nestor that we may seewhat he has got to tell us. Beg of him to speak the truth, and he willtell no lies, for he is an excellent person.”“But how, Mentor,” replied Telemachus, “dare I go up to Nestor, and howam I to address him? I have never yet been used to holding longconversations with people, and am ashamed to begin questioning one whois so much older than myself.”“Some things, Telemachus,” answered Minerva, “will be suggested to youby your own instinct, and heaven will prompt you further; for I amassured that the gods have been with you from the time of your birthuntil now.”She then went quickly on, and Telemachus followed in her steps tillthey reached the place where the guilds of the Pylian people wereassembled. There they found Nestor sitting with his sons, while hiscompany round him were busy getting dinner ready, and putting pieces ofmeat on to the spits26 while other pieces were cooking. When they sawthe strangers they crowded round them, took them by the hand and badethem take their places. Nestor’s son Pisistratus at once offered hishand to each of them, and seated them on some soft sheepskins that werelying on the sands near his father and his brother Thrasymedes. Then hegave them their portions of the inward meats and poured wine for theminto a golden cup, handing it to Minerva first, and saluting her at thesame time.“Offer a prayer, sir,” said he, “to King Neptune, for it is his feastthat you are joining; when you have duly prayed and made your drinkoffering, pass the cup to your friend that he may do so also. I doubtnot that he too lifts his hands in prayer, for man cannot live withoutGod in the world. Still he is younger than you are, and is much of anage with myself, so I will give you the precedence.”As he spoke he handed her the cup. Minerva thought it very right andproper of him to have given it to herself first;27 she accordinglybegan praying heartily to Neptune. “O thou,” she cried, “thatencirclest the earth, vouchsafe to grant the prayers of thy servantsthat call upon thee. More especially we pray thee send down thy graceon Nestor and on his sons; thereafter also make the rest of the Pylianpeople some handsome return for the goodly hecatomb they are offeringyou. Lastly, grant Telemachus and myself a happy issue, in respect ofthe matter that has brought us in our ship to Pylos.”When she had thus made an end of praying, she handed the cup toTelemachus and he prayed likewise. By and by, when the outer meats wereroasted and had been taken off the spits, the carvers gave every manhis portion and they all made an excellent dinner. As soon as they hadhad enough to eat and drink, Nestor, knight of Gerene, began to speak.“Now,” said he, “that our guests have done their dinner, it will bebest to ask them who they are. Who, then, sir strangers, are you, andfrom what port have you sailed? Are you traders? or do you sail theseas as rovers with your hand against every man, and every man’s handagainst you?”Telemachus answered boldly, for Minerva had given him courage to askabout his father and get himself a good name.“Nestor,” said he, “son of Neleus, honour to the Achaean name, you askwhence we come, and I will tell you. We come from Ithaca underNeritum,28 and the matter about which I would speak is of private notpublic import. I seek news of my unhappy father Ulysses, who is said tohave sacked the town of Troy in company with yourself. We know whatfate befell each one of the other heroes who fought at Troy, but asregards Ulysses heaven has hidden from us the knowledge even that he isdead at all, for no one can certify us in what place he perished, norsay whether he fell in battle on the mainland, or was lost at sea amidthe waves of Amphitrite. Therefore I am suppliant at your knees, ifhaply you may be pleased to tell me of his melancholy end, whether yousaw it with your own eyes, or heard it from some other traveller, forhe was a man born to trouble. Do not soften things out of any pity forme, but tell me in all plainness exactly what you saw. If my bravefather Ulysses ever did you loyal service, either by word or deed, whenyou Achaeans were harassed among the Trojans, bear it in mind now as inmy favour and tell me truly all.”“My friend,” answered Nestor, “you recall a time of much sorrow to mymind, for the brave Achaeans suffered much both at sea, whileprivateering under Achilles, and when fighting before the great city ofking Priam. Our best men all of them fell there—Ajax, Achilles,Patroclus peer of gods in counsel, and my own dear son Antilochus, aman singularly fleet of foot and in fight valiant. But we suffered muchmore than this; what mortal tongue indeed could tell the whole story?Though you were to stay here and question me for five years, or evensix, I could not tell you all that the Achaeans suffered, and you wouldturn homeward weary of my tale before it ended. Nine long years did wetry every kind of stratagem, but the hand of heaven was against us;during all this time there was no one who could compare with yourfather in subtlety—if indeed you are his son—I can hardly believe myeyes—and you talk just like him too—no one would say that people ofsuch different ages could speak so much alike. He and I never had anykind of difference from first to last neither in camp nor council, butin singleness of heart and purpose we advised the Argives how all mightbe ordered for the best.“When, however, we had sacked the city of Priam, and were setting sailin our ships as heaven had dispersed us, then Jove saw fit to vex theArgives on their homeward voyage; for they had not all been either wiseor understanding, and hence many came to a bad end through thedispleasure of Jove’s daughter Minerva, who brought about a quarrelbetween the two sons of Atreus.“The sons of Atreus called a meeting which was not as it should be, forit was sunset and the Achaeans were heavy with wine. When theyexplained why they had called the people together, it seemed thatMenelaus was for sailing homeward at once, and this displeasedAgamemnon, who thought that we should wait till we had offeredhecatombs to appease the anger of Minerva. Fool that he was, he mighthave known that he would not prevail with her, for when the gods havemade up their minds they do not change them lightly. So the two stoodbandying hard words, whereon the Achaeans sprang to their feet with acry that rent the air, and were of two minds as to what they should do.“That night we rested and nursed our anger, for Jove was hatchingmischief against us. But in the morning some of us drew our ships intothe water and put our goods with our women on board, while the rest,about half in number, stayed behind with Agamemnon. We—the otherhalf—embarked and sailed; and the ships went well, for heaven hadsmoothed the sea. When we reached Tenedos we offered sacrifices to thegods, for we were longing to get home; cruel Jove, however, did not yetmean that we should do so, and raised a second quarrel in the course ofwhich some among us turned their ships back again, and sailed awayunder Ulysses to make their peace with Agamemnon; but I, and all theships that were with me pressed forward, for I saw that mischief wasbrewing. The son of Tydeus went on also with me, and his crews withhim. Later on Menelaus joined us at Lesbos, and found us making up ourminds about our course—for we did not know whether to go outside Chiosby the island of Psyra, keeping this to our left, or inside Chios, overagainst the stormy headland of Mimas. So we asked heaven for a sign,and were shown one to the effect that we should be soonest out ofdanger if we headed our ships across the open sea to Euboea. This wetherefore did, and a fair wind sprang up which gave us a quick passageduring the night to Geraestus,29 where we offered many sacrifices toNeptune for having helped us so far on our way. Four days later Diomedand his men stationed their ships in Argos, but I held on for Pylos,and the wind never fell light from the day when heaven first made itfair for me.“Therefore, my dear young friend, I returned without hearing anythingabout the others. I know neither who got home safely nor who were lostbut, as in duty bound, I will give you without reserve the reports thathave reached me since I have been here in my own house. They say theMyrmidons returned home safely under Achilles’ son Neoptolemus; so alsodid the valiant son of Poias, Philoctetes. Idomeneus, again, lost nomen at sea, and all his followers who escaped death in the field gotsafe home with him to Crete. No matter how far out of the world youlive, you will have heard of Agamemnon and the bad end he came to atthe hands of Aegisthus—and a fearful reckoning did Aegisthus presentlypay. See what a good thing it is for a man to leave a son behind him todo as Orestes did, who killed false Aegisthus the murderer of his noblefather. You too, then—for you are a tall smart-looking fellow—show yourmettle and make yourself a name in story.”“Nestor son of Neleus,” answered Telemachus, “honour to the Achaeanname, the Achaeans applaud Orestes and his name will live through alltime for he has avenged his father nobly. Would that heaven might grantme to do like vengeance on the insolence of the wicked suitors, who areill treating me and plotting my ruin; but the gods have no suchhappiness in store for me and for my father, so we must bear it as bestwe may.”“My friend,” said Nestor, “now that you remind me, I remember to haveheard that your mother has many suitors, who are ill disposed towardsyou and are making havoc of your estate. Do you submit to this tamely,or are public feeling and the voice of heaven against you? Who knowsbut what Ulysses may come back after all, and pay these scoundrels infull, either single-handed or with a force of Achaeans behind him? IfMinerva were to take as great a liking to you as she did to Ulysseswhen we were fighting before Troy (for I never yet saw the gods soopenly fond of any one as Minerva then was of your father), if shewould take as good care of you as she did of him, these wooers wouldsoon some of them forget their wooing.”Telemachus answered, “I can expect nothing of the kind; it would be fartoo much to hope for. I dare not let myself think of it. Even thoughthe gods themselves willed it no such good fortune could befall me.”On this Minerva said, “Telemachus, what are you talking about? Heavenhas a long arm if it is minded to save a man; and if it were me, Ishould not care how much I suffered before getting home, provided Icould be safe when I was once there. I would rather this, than get homequickly, and then be killed in my own house as Agamemnon was by thetreachery of Aegisthus and his wife. Still, death is certain, and whena man’s hour is come, not even the gods can save him, no matter howfond they are of him.”“Mentor,” answered Telemachus, “do not let us talk about it any more.There is no chance of my father’s ever coming back; the gods have longsince counselled his destruction. There is something else, however,about which I should like to ask Nestor, for he knows much more thanany one else does. They say he has reigned for three generations sothat it is like talking to an immortal. Tell me, therefore, Nestor, andtell me true; how did Agamemnon come to die in that way? What wasMenelaus doing? And how came false Aegisthus to kill so far better aman than himself? Was Menelaus away from Achaean Argos, voyagingelsewhither among mankind, that Aegisthus took heart and killedAgamemnon?”“I will tell you truly,” answered Nestor, “and indeed you have yourselfdivined how it all happened. If Menelaus when he got back from Troy hadfound Aegisthus still alive in his house, there would have been nobarrow heaped up for him, not even when he was dead, but he would havebeen thrown outside the city to dogs and vultures, and not a womanwould have mourned him, for he had done a deed of great wickedness; butwe were over there, fighting hard at Troy, and Aegisthus, who wastaking his ease quietly in the heart of Argos, cajoled Agamemnon’s wifeClytemnestra with incessant flattery.“At first she would have nothing to do with his wicked scheme, for shewas of a good natural disposition;30 moreover there was a bard withher, to whom Agamemnon had given strict orders on setting out for Troy,that he was to keep guard over his wife; but when heaven had counselledher destruction, Aegisthus carried this bard off to a desert island andleft him there for crows and seagulls to batten upon—after which shewent willingly enough to the house of Aegisthus. Then he offered manyburnt sacrifices to the gods, and decorated many temples withtapestries and gilding, for he had succeeded far beyond hisexpectations.“Meanwhile Menelaus and I were on our way home from Troy, on good termswith one another. When we got to Sunium, which is the point of Athens,Apollo with his painless shafts killed Phrontis the steersman ofMenelaus’ ship (and never man knew better how to handle a vessel inrough weather) so that he died then and there with the helm in hishand, and Menelaus, though very anxious to press forward, had to waitin order to bury his comrade and give him his due funeral rites.Presently, when he too could put to sea again, and had sailed on as faras the Malean heads, Jove counselled evil against him and made it blowhard till the waves ran mountains high. Here he divided his fleet andtook the one half towards Crete where the Cydonians dwell round aboutthe waters of the river Iardanus. There is a high headland hereaboutsstretching out into the sea from a place called Gortyn, and all alongthis part of the coast as far as Phaestus the sea runs high when thereis a south wind blowing, but after Phaestus the coast is moreprotected, for a small headland can make a great shelter. Here thispart of the fleet was driven on to the rocks and wrecked; but the crewsjust managed to save themselves. As for the other five ships, they weretaken by winds and seas to Egypt, where Menelaus gathered much gold andsubstance among people of an alien speech. Meanwhile Aegisthus here athome plotted his evil deed. For seven years after he had killedAgamemnon he ruled in Mycene, and the people were obedient under him,but in the eighth year Orestes came back from Athens to be his bane,and killed the murderer of his father. Then he celebrated the funeralrites of his mother and of false Aegisthus by a banquet to the peopleof Argos, and on that very day Menelaus came home,31 with as muchtreasure as his ships could carry.“Take my advice then, and do not go travelling about for long so farfrom home, nor leave your property with such dangerous people in yourhouse; they will eat up everything you have among them, and you willhave been on a fool’s errand. Still, I should advise you by all meansto go and visit Menelaus, who has lately come off a voyage among suchdistant peoples as no man could ever hope to get back from, when thewinds had once carried him so far out of his reckoning; even birdscannot fly the distance in a twelve-month, so vast and terrible are theseas that they must cross. Go to him, therefore, by sea, and take yourown men with you; or if you would rather travel by land you can have achariot, you can have horses, and here are my sons who can escort youto Lacedaemon where Menelaus lives. Beg of him to speak the truth, andhe will tell you no lies, for he is an excellent person.”As he spoke the sun set and it came on dark, whereon Minerva said,“Sir, all that you have said is well; now, however, order the tonguesof the victims to be cut, and mix wine that we may make drink-offeringsto Neptune, and the other immortals, and then go to bed, for it is bedtime. People should go away early and not keep late hours at areligious festival.”Thus spoke the daughter of Jove, and they obeyed her saying. Menservants poured water over the hands of the guests, while pages filledthe mixing-bowls with wine and water, and handed it round after givingevery man his drink offering; then they threw the tongues of thevictims into the fire, and stood up to make their drink offerings. Whenthey had made their offerings and had drunk each as much as he wasminded, Minerva and Telemachus were for going on board their ship, butNestor caught them up at once and stayed them.“Heaven and the immortal gods,” he exclaimed, “forbid that you shouldleave my house to go on board of a ship. Do you think I am so poor andshort of clothes, or that I have so few cloaks and as to be unable tofind comfortable beds both for myself and for my guests? Let me tellyou I have store both of rugs and cloaks, and shall not permit the sonof my old friend Ulysses to camp down on the deck of a ship—not while Ilive—nor yet will my sons after me, but they will keep open house as Ihave done.”Then Minerva answered, “Sir, you have spoken well, and it will be muchbetter that Telemachus should do as you have said; he, therefore, shallreturn with you and sleep at your house, but I must go back to giveorders to my crew, and keep them in good heart. I am the only olderperson among them; the rest are all young men of Telemachus’ own age,who have taken this voyage out of friendship; so I must return to theship and sleep there. Moreover to-morrow I must go to the Cauconianswhere I have a large sum of money long owing to me. As for Telemachus,now that he is your guest, send him to Lacedaemon in a chariot, and letone of your sons go with him. Be pleased to also provide him with yourbest and fleetest horses.”When she had thus spoken, she flew away in the form of an eagle, andall marvelled as they beheld it. Nestor was astonished, and tookTelemachus by the hand. “My friend,” said he, “I see that you are goingto be a great hero some day, since the gods wait upon you thus whileyou are still so young. This can have been none other of those whodwell in heaven than Jove’s redoubtable daughter, the Trito-born, whoshewed such favour towards your brave father among the Argives. Holyqueen,” he continued, “vouchsafe to send down thy grace upon myself, mygood wife, and my children. In return, I will offer you in sacrifice abroad-browed heifer of a year old, unbroken, and never yet brought byman under the yoke. I will gild her horns, and will offer her up to youin sacrifice.”Thus did he pray, and Minerva heard his prayer. He then led the way tohis own house, followed by his sons and sons in law. When they had gotthere and had taken their places on the benches and seats, he mixedthem a bowl of sweet wine that was eleven years old when thehousekeeper took the lid off the jar that held it. As he mixed thewine, he prayed much and made drink offerings to Minerva, daughter ofAegis-bearing Jove. Then, when they had made their drink offerings andhad drunk each as much as he was minded, the others went home to bedeach in his own abode; but Nestor put Telemachus to sleep in the roomthat was over the gateway along with Pisistratus, who was the onlyunmarried son now left him. As for himself, he slept in an inner roomof the house, with the queen his wife by his side.Now when the child of morning rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, Nestor lefthis couch and took his seat on the benches of white and polished marblethat stood in front of his house. Here aforetime sat Neleus, peer ofgods in counsel, but he was now dead, and had gone to the house ofHades; so Nestor sat in his seat sceptre in hand, as guardian of thepublic weal. His sons as they left their rooms gathered round him,Echephron, Stratius, Perseus, Aretus, and Thrasymedes; the sixth sonwas Pisistratus, and when Telemachus joined them they made him sit withthem. Nestor then addressed them.“My sons,” said he, “make haste to do as I shall bid you. I wish firstand foremost to propitiate the great goddess Minerva, who manifestedherself visibly to me during yesterday’s festivities. Go, then, one orother of you to the plain, tell the stockman to look me out a heifer,and come on here with it at once. Another must go to Telemachus’ ship,and invite all the crew, leaving two men only in charge of the vessel.Some one else will run and fetch Laerceus the goldsmith to gild thehorns of the heifer. The rest, stay all of you where you are; tell themaids in the house to prepare an excellent dinner, and to fetch seats,and logs of wood for a burnt offering. Tell them also to bring me someclear spring water.”On this they hurried off on their several errands. The heifer wasbrought in from the plain, and Telemachus’s crew came from the ship;the goldsmith brought the anvil, hammer, and tongs, with which heworked his gold, and Minerva herself came to accept the sacrifice.Nestor gave out the gold, and the smith gilded the horns of the heiferthat the goddess might have pleasure in their beauty. Then Stratius andEchephron brought her in by the horns; Aretus fetched water from thehouse in a ewer that had a flower pattern on it, and in his other handhe held a basket of barley meal; sturdy Thrasymedes stood by with asharp axe, ready to strike the heifer, while Perseus held a bucket.Then Nestor began with washing his hands and sprinkling the barleymeal, and he offered many a prayer to Minerva as he threw a lock fromthe heifer’s head upon the fire.When they had done praying and sprinkling the barley meal32 Thrasymedesdealt his blow, and brought the heifer down with a stroke that cutthrough the tendons at the base of her neck, whereon the daughters anddaughters in law of Nestor, and his venerable wife Eurydice (she waseldest daughter to Clymenus) screamed with delight. Then they liftedthe heifer’s head from off the ground, and Pisistratus cut her throat.When she had done bleeding and was quite dead, they cut her up. Theycut out the thigh bones all in due course, wrapped them round in twolayers of fat, and set some pieces of raw meat on the top of them; thenNestor laid them upon the wood fire and poured wine over them, whilethe young men stood near him with five-pronged spits in their hands.When the thighs were burned and they had tasted the inward meats, theycut the rest of the meat up small, put the pieces on the spits andtoasted them over the fire.Meanwhile lovely Polycaste, Nestor’s youngest daughter, washedTelemachus. When she had washed him and anointed him with oil, shebrought him a fair mantle and shirt,33 and he looked like a god as hecame from the bath and took his seat by the side of Nestor. When theouter meats were done they drew them off the spits and sat down todinner where they were waited upon by some worthy henchmen, who keptpouring them out their wine in cups of gold. As soon as they had hadenough to eat and drink Nestor said, “Sons, put Telemachus’s horses tothe chariot that he may start at once.”Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said, and yoked thefleet horses to the chariot. The housekeeper packed them up a provisionof bread, wine, and sweet meats fit for the sons of princes. ThenTelemachus got into the chariot, while Pisistratus gathered up thereins and took his seat beside him. He lashed the horses on and theyflew forward nothing loth into the open country, leaving the highcitadel of Pylos behind them. All that day did they travel, swaying theyoke upon their necks till the sun went down and darkness was over allthe land. Then they reached Pherae where Diocles lived, who was son toOrtilochus and grandson to Alpheus. Here they passed the night andDiocles entertained them hospitably. When the child of morning,rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, they again yoked their horses and droveout through the gateway under the echoing gatehouse.34 Pisistratuslashed the horses on and they flew forward nothing loth; presently theycame to the corn lands of the open country, and in the course of timecompleted their journey, so well did their steeds take them.35Now when the sun had set and darkness was over the land,BOOK IVTHE VISIT TO KING MENELAUS, WHO TELLS HIS STORY—MEANWHILE THE SUITORSIN ITHACA PLOT AGAINST TELEMACHUS.they reached the low lying city of Lacedaemon, where they drovestraight to the abode of Menelaus36 [and found him in his own house,feasting with his many clansmen in honour of the wedding of his son,and also of his daughter, whom he was marrying to the son of thatvaliant warrior Achilles. He had given his consent and promised her tohim while he was still at Troy, and now the gods were bringing themarriage about; so he was sending her with chariots and horses to thecity of the Myrmidons over whom Achilles’ son was reigning. For hisonly son he had found a bride from Sparta,37 the daughter of Alector.This son, Megapenthes, was born to him of a bondwoman, for heavenvouchsafed Helen no more children after she had borne Hermione, who wasfair as golden Venus herself.So the neighbours and kinsmen of Menelaus were feasting and makingmerry in his house. There was a bard also to sing to them and play hislyre, while two tumblers went about performing in the midst of themwhen the man struck up with his tune.38Telemachus and the son of Nestor stayed their horses at the gate,whereon Eteoneus servant to Menelaus came out, and as soon as he sawthem ran hurrying back into the house to tell his Master. He went closeup to him and said, “Menelaus, there are some strangers come here, twomen, who look like sons of Jove. What are we to do? Shall we take theirhorses out, or tell them to find friends elsewhere as they best can?”Menelaus was very angry and said, “Eteoneus, son of Boethous, you neverused to be a fool, but now you talk like a simpleton. Take their horsesout, of course, and show the strangers in that they may have supper;you and I have staid often enough at other people’s houses before wegot back here, where heaven grant that we may rest in peacehenceforward.”So Eteoneus bustled back and bade the other servants come with him.They took their sweating steeds from under the yoke, made them fast tothe mangers, and gave them a feed of oats and barley mixed. Then theyleaned the chariot against the end wall of the courtyard, and led theway into the house. Telemachus and Pisistratus were astonished whenthey saw it, for its splendour was as that of the sun and moon; then,when they had admired everything to their heart’s content, they wentinto the bath room and washed themselves.When the servants had washed them and anointed them with oil, theybrought them woollen cloaks and shirts, and the two took their seats bythe side of Menelaus. A maid-servant brought them water in a beautifulgolden ewer, and poured it into a silver basin for them to wash theirhands; and she drew a clean table beside them. An upper servant broughtthem bread, and offered them many good things of what there was in thehouse, while the carver fetched them plates of all manner of meats andset cups of gold by their side.Menelaus then greeted them saying, “Fall to, and welcome; when you havedone supper I shall ask who you are, for the lineage of such men as youcannot have been lost. You must be descended from a line ofsceptre-bearing kings, for poor people do not have such sons as youare.”On this he handed them39 a piece of fat roast loin, which had been setnear him as being a prime part, and they laid their hands on the goodthings that were before them; as soon as they had had enough to eat anddrink, Telemachus said to the son of Nestor, with his head so closethat no one might hear, “Look, Pisistratus, man after my own heart, seethe gleam of bronze and gold—of amber,40 ivory, and silver. Everythingis so splendid that it is like seeing the palace of Olympian Jove. I amlost in admiration.”Menelaus overheard him and said, “No one, my sons, can hold his ownwith Jove, for his house and everything about him is immortal; butamong mortal men—well, there may be another who has as much wealth as Ihave, or there may not; but at all events I have travelled much andhave undergone much hardship, for it was nearly eight years before Icould get home with my fleet. I went to Cyprus, Phoenicia and theEgyptians; I went also to the Ethiopians, the Sidonians, and theErembians, and to Libya where the lambs have horns as soon as they areborn, and the sheep lamb down three times a year. Every one in thatcountry, whether master or man, has plenty of cheese, meat, and goodmilk, for the ewes yield all the year round. But while I was travellingand getting great riches among these people, my brother was secretlyand shockingly murdered through the perfidy of his wicked wife, so thatI have no pleasure in being lord of all this wealth. Whoever yourparents may be they must have told you about all this, and of my heavyloss in the ruin41 of a stately mansion fully and magnificentlyfurnished. Would that I had only a third of what I now have so that Ihad stayed at home, and all those were living who perished on the plainof Troy, far from Argos. I often grieve, as I sit here in my house, forone and all of them. At times I cry aloud for sorrow, but presently Ileave off again, for crying is cold comfort and one soon tires of it.Yet grieve for these as I may, I do so for one man more than for themall. I cannot even think of him without loathing both food and sleep,so miserable does he make me, for no one of all the Achaeans worked sohard or risked so much as he did. He took nothing by it, and has left alegacy of sorrow to myself, for he has been gone a long time, and weknow not whether he is alive or dead. His old father, hislong-suffering wife Penelope, and his son Telemachus, whom he leftbehind him an infant in arms, are plunged in grief on his account.”Thus spoke Menelaus, and the heart of Telemachus yearned as hebethought him of his father. Tears fell from his eyes as he heard himthus mentioned, so that he held his cloak before his face with bothhands. When Menelaus saw this he doubted whether to let him choose hisown time for speaking, or to ask him at once and find what it was allabout.While he was thus in two minds Helen came down from her high vaultedand perfumed room, looking as lovely as Diana herself. Adraste broughther a seat, Alcippe a soft woollen rug while Phylo fetched her thesilver work-box which Alcandra wife of Polybus had given her. Polybuslived in Egyptian Thebes, which is the richest city in the whole world;he gave Menelaus two baths, both of pure silver, two tripods, and tentalents of gold; besides all this, his wife gave Helen some beautifulpresents, to wit, a golden distaff, and a silver work box that ran onwheels, with a gold band round the top of it. Phylo now placed this byher side, full of fine spun yarn, and a distaff charged with violetcoloured wool was laid upon the top of it. Then Helen took her seat,put her feet upon the footstool, and began to question her husband.42“Do we know, Menelaus,” said she, “the names of these strangers whohave come to visit us? Shall I guess right or wrong?—but I cannot helpsaying what I think. Never yet have I seen either man or woman so likesomebody else (indeed when I look at him I hardly know what to think)as this young man is like Telemachus, whom Ulysses left as a babybehind him, when you Achaeans went to Troy with battle in your hearts,on account of my most shameless self.”“My dear wife,” replied Menelaus, “I see the likeness just as you do.His hands and feet are just like Ulysses; so is his hair, with theshape of his head and the expression of his eyes. Moreover, when I wastalking about Ulysses, and saying how much he had suffered on myaccount, tears fell from his eyes, and he hid his face in his mantle.”Then Pisistratus said, “Menelaus, son of Atreus, you are right inthinking that this young man is Telemachus, but he is very modest, andis ashamed to come here and begin opening up discourse with one whoseconversation is so divinely interesting as your own. My father, Nestor,sent me to escort him hither, for he wanted to know whether you couldgive him any counsel or suggestion. A son has always trouble at homewhen his father has gone away leaving him without supporters; and thisis how Telemachus is now placed, for his father is absent, and there isno one among his own people to stand by him.”“Bless my heart,” replied Menelaus, “then I am receiving a visit fromthe son of a very dear friend, who suffered much hardship for my sake.I had always hoped to entertain him with most marked distinction whenheaven had granted us a safe return from beyond the seas. I should havefounded a city for him in Argos, and built him a house. I should havemade him leave Ithaca with his goods, his son, and all his people, andshould have sacked for them some one of the neighbouring cities thatare subject to me. We should thus have seen one another continually,and nothing but death could have interrupted so close and happy anintercourse. I suppose, however, that heaven grudged us such great goodfortune, for it has prevented the poor fellow from ever getting home atall.”Thus did he speak, and his words set them all a weeping. Helen wept,Telemachus wept, and so did Menelaus, nor could Pisistratus keep hiseyes from filling, when he remembered his dear brother Antilochus whomthe son of bright Dawn had killed. Thereon he said to Menelaus,“Sir, my father Nestor, when we used to talk about you at home, told meyou were a person of rare and excellent understanding. If, then, it bepossible, do as I would urge you. I am not fond of crying while I amgetting my supper. Morning will come in due course, and in the forenoonI care not how much I cry for those that are dead and gone. This is allwe can do for the poor things. We can only shave our heads for them andwring the tears from our cheeks. I had a brother who died at Troy; hewas by no means the worst man there; you are sure to have known him—hisname was Antilochus; I never set eyes upon him myself, but they saythat he was singularly fleet of foot and in fight valiant.”“Your discretion, my friend,” answered Menelaus, “is beyond your years.It is plain you take after your father. One can soon see when a man isson to one whom heaven has blessed both as regards wife andoffspring—and it has blessed Nestor from first to last all his days,giving him a green old age in his own house, with sons about him whoare both well disposed and valiant. We will put an end therefore to allthis weeping, and attend to our supper again. Let water be poured overour hands. Telemachus and I can talk with one another fully in themorning.”On this Asphalion, one of the servants, poured water over their handsand they laid their hands on the good things that were before them.Then Jove’s daughter Helen bethought her of another matter. She druggedthe wine with an herb that banishes all care, sorrow, and ill humour.Whoever drinks wine thus drugged cannot shed a single tear all the restof the day, not even though his father and mother both of them dropdown dead, or he sees a brother or a son hewn in pieces before his veryeyes. This drug, of such sovereign power and virtue, had been given toHelen by Polydamna wife of Thon, a woman of Egypt, where there grow allsorts of herbs, some good to put into the mixing bowl and otherspoisonous. Moreover, every one in the whole country is a skilledphysician, for they are of the race of Paeeon. When Helen had put thisdrug in the bowl, and had told the servants to serve the wine round,she said:“Menelaus, son of Atreus, and you my good friends, sons of honourablemen (which is as Jove wills, for he is the giver both of good and evil,and can do what he chooses), feast here as you will, and listen while Itell you a tale in season. I cannot indeed name every single one of theexploits of Ulysses, but I can say what he did when he was before Troy,and you Achaeans were in all sorts of difficulties. He covered himselfwith wounds and bruises, dressed himself all in rags, and entered theenemy’s city looking like a menial or a beggar, and quite differentfrom what he did when he was among his own people. In this disguise heentered the city of Troy, and no one said anything to him. I alonerecognised him and began to question him, but he was too cunning forme. When, however, I had washed and anointed him and had given himclothes, and after I had sworn a solemn oath not to betray him to theTrojans till he had got safely back to his own camp and to the ships,he told me all that the Achaeans meant to do. He killed many Trojansand got much information before he reached the Argive camp, for allwhich things the Trojan women made lamentation, but for my own part Iwas glad, for my heart was beginning to yearn after my home, and I wasunhappy about the wrong that Venus had done me in taking me over there,away from my country, my girl, and my lawful wedded husband, who isindeed by no means deficient either in person or understanding.”Then Menelaus said, “All that you have been saying, my dear wife, istrue. I have travelled much, and have had much to do with heroes, but Ihave never seen such another man as Ulysses. What endurance too, andwhat courage he displayed within the wooden horse, wherein all thebravest of the Argives were lying in wait to bring death anddestruction upon the Trojans.43 At that moment you came up to us; somegod who wished well to the Trojans must have set you on to it and youhad Deiphobus with you. Three times did you go all round our hidingplace and pat it; you called our chiefs each by his own name, andmimicked all our wives—Diomed, Ulysses, and I from our seats insideheard what a noise you made. Diomed and I could not make up our mindswhether to spring out then and there, or to answer you from inside, butUlysses held us all in check, so we sat quite still, all exceptAnticlus, who was beginning to answer you, when Ulysses clapped his twobrawny hands over his mouth, and kept them there. It was this thatsaved us all, for he muzzled Anticlus till Minerva took you awayagain.”“How sad,” exclaimed Telemachus, “that all this was of no avail to savehim, nor yet his own iron courage. But now, sir, be pleased to send usall to bed, that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon of sleep.”On this Helen told the maid servants to set beds in the room that wasin the gatehouse, and to make them with good red rugs, and spreadcoverlets on the top of them with woollen cloaks for the guests towear. So the maids went out, carrying a torch, and made the beds, towhich a man-servant presently conducted the strangers. Thus, then, didTelemachus and Pisistratus sleep there in the forecourt, while the sonof Atreus lay in an inner room with lovely Helen by his side.When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, Menelaus roseand dressed himself. He bound his sandals on to his comely feet, girdedhis sword about his shoulders, and left his room looking like animmortal god. Then, taking a seat near Telemachus he said:“And what, Telemachus, has led you to take this long sea voyage toLacedaemon? Are you on public, or private business? Tell me all aboutit.”“I have come, sir,” replied Telemachus, “to see if you can tell meanything about my father. I am being eaten out of house and home; myfair estate is being wasted, and my house is full of miscreants whokeep killing great numbers of my sheep and oxen, on the pretence ofpaying their addresses to my mother. Therefore, I am suppliant at yourknees if haply you may tell me about my father’s melancholy end,whether you saw it with your own eyes, or heard it from some othertraveller; for he was a man born to trouble. Do not soften things outof any pity for myself, but tell me in all plainness exactly what yousaw. If my brave father Ulysses ever did you loyal service either byword or deed, when you Achaeans were harassed by the Trojans, bear itin mind now as in my favour and tell me truly all.”Menelaus on hearing this was very much shocked. “So,” he exclaimed,“these cowards would usurp a brave man’s bed? A hind might as well layher new born young in the lair of a lion, and then go off to feed inthe forest or in some grassy dell: the lion when he comes back to hislair will make short work with the pair of them—and so will Ulysseswith these suitors. By father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, if Ulysses isstill the man that he was when he wrestled with Philomeleides inLesbos, and threw him so heavily that all the Achaeans cheered him—ifhe is still such and were to come near these suitors, they would have ashort shrift and a sorry wedding. As regards your questions, however, Iwill not prevaricate nor deceive you, but will tell you withoutconcealment all that the old man of the sea told me.“I was trying to come on here, but the gods detained me in Egypt, formy hecatombs had not given them full satisfaction, and the gods arevery strict about having their dues. Now off Egypt, about as far as aship can sail in a day with a good stiff breeze behind her, there is anisland called Pharos—it has a good harbour from which vessels can getout into open sea when they have taken in water—and here the godsbecalmed me twenty days without so much as a breath of fair wind tohelp me forward. We should have run clean out of provisions and my menwould have starved, if a goddess had not taken pity upon me and savedme in the person of Idothea, daughter to Proteus, the old man of thesea, for she had taken a great fancy to me.“She came to me one day when I was by myself, as I often was, for themen used to go with their barbed hooks, all over the island in the hopeof catching a fish or two to save them from the pangs of hunger.‘Stranger,’ said she, ‘it seems to me that you like starving in thisway—at any rate it does not greatly trouble you, for you stick here dayafter day, without even trying to get away though your men are dying byinches.’“‘Let me tell you,’ said I, ‘whichever of the goddesses you may happento be, that I am not staying here of my own accord, but must haveoffended the gods that live in heaven. Tell me, therefore, for the godsknow everything, which of the immortals it is that is hindering me inthis way, and tell me also how I may sail the sea so as to reach myhome.’“‘Stranger,’ replied she, ‘I will make it all quite clear to you. Thereis an old immortal who lives under the sea hereabouts and whose name isProteus. He is an Egyptian, and people say he is my father; he isNeptune’s head man and knows every inch of ground all over the bottomof the sea. If you can snare him and hold him tight, he will tell youabout your voyage, what courses you are to take, and how you are tosail the sea so as to reach your home. He will also tell you, if you sowill, all that has been going on at your house both good and bad, whileyou have been away on your long and dangerous journey.’“‘Can you show me,’ said I, ‘some stratagem by means of which I maycatch this old god without his suspecting it and finding me out? For agod is not easily caught—not by a mortal man.’“‘Stranger,’ said she, ‘I will make it all quite clear to you. Aboutthe time when the sun shall have reached mid heaven, the old man of thesea comes up from under the waves, heralded by the West wind that fursthe water over his head. As soon as he has come up he lies down, andgoes to sleep in a great sea cave, where the seals—Halosydne’s chickensas they call them—come up also from the grey sea, and go to sleep inshoals all round him; and a very strong and fish-like smell do theybring with them. 44 Early to-morrow morning I will take you to thisplace and will lay you in ambush. Pick out, therefore, the three bestmen you have in your fleet, and I will tell you all the tricks that theold man will play you.“‘First he will look over all his seals, and count them; then, when hehas seen them and tallied them on his five fingers, he will go to sleepamong them, as a shepherd among his sheep. The moment you see that heis asleep seize him; put forth all your strength and hold him fast, forhe will do his very utmost to get away from you. He will turn himselfinto every kind of creature that goes upon the earth, and will becomealso both fire and water; but you must hold him fast and grip himtighter and tighter, till he begins to talk to you and comes back towhat he was when you saw him go to sleep; then you may slacken yourhold and let him go; and you can ask him which of the gods it is thatis angry with you, and what you must do to reach your home over theseas.’“Having so said she dived under the waves, whereon I turned back to theplace where my ships were ranged upon the shore; and my heart wasclouded with care as I went along. When I reached my ship we got supperready, for night was falling, and camped down upon the beach.“When the child of morning rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, I took thethree men on whose prowess of all kinds I could most rely, and wentalong by the sea-side, praying heartily to heaven. Meanwhile thegoddess fetched me up four seal skins from the bottom of the sea, allof them just skinned, for she meant playing a trick upon her father.Then she dug four pits for us to lie in, and sat down to wait till weshould come up. When we were close to her, she made us lie down in thepits one after the other, and threw a seal skin over each of us. Ourambuscade would have been intolerable, for the stench of the fishyseals was most distressing45—who would go to bed with a sea monster ifhe could help it?—but here, too, the goddess helped us, and thought ofsomething that gave us great relief, for she put some ambrosia undereach man’s nostrils, which was so fragrant that it killed the smell ofthe seals.46“We waited the whole morning and made the best of it, watching theseals come up in hundreds to bask upon the sea shore, till at noon theold man of the sea came up too, and when he had found his fat seals hewent over them and counted them. We were among the first he counted,and he never suspected any guile, but laid himself down to sleep assoon as he had done counting. Then we rushed upon him with a shout andseized him; on which he began at once with his old tricks, and changedhimself first into a lion with a great mane; then all of a sudden hebecame a dragon, a leopard, a wild boar; the next moment he was runningwater, and then again directly he was a tree, but we stuck to him andnever lost hold, till at last the cunning old creature becamedistressed, and said, ‘Which of the gods was it, Son of Atreus, thathatched this plot with you for snaring me and seizing me against mywill? What do you want?’“‘You know that yourself, old man,’ I answered, ‘you will gain nothingby trying to put me off. It is because I have been kept so long in thisisland, and see no sign of my being able to get away. I am losing allheart; tell me, then, for you gods know everything, which of theimmortals it is that is hindering me, and tell me also how I may sailthe sea so as to reach my home?’“Then,’ he said, ‘if you would finish your voyage and get home quickly,you must offer sacrifices to Jove and to the rest of the gods beforeembarking; for it is decreed that you shall not get back to yourfriends, and to your own house, till you have returned to theheaven-fed stream of Egypt, and offered holy hecatombs to the immortalgods that reign in heaven. When you have done this they will let youfinish your voyage.’“I was broken hearted when I heard that I must go back all that longand terrible voyage to Egypt;47 nevertheless, I answered, ‘I will doall, old man, that you have laid upon me; but now tell me, and tell metrue, whether all the Achaeans whom Nestor and I left behind us when weset sail from Troy have got home safely, or whether any one of themcame to a bad end either on board his own ship or among his friendswhen the days of his fighting were done.’“‘Son of Atreus,’ he answered, ‘why ask me? You had better not knowwhat I can tell you, for your eyes will surely fill when you have heardmy story. Many of those about whom you ask are dead and gone, but manystill remain, and only two of the chief men among the Achaeans perishedduring their return home. As for what happened on the field ofbattle—you were there yourself. A third Achaean leader is still at sea,alive, but hindered from returning. Ajax was wrecked, for Neptune drovehim on to the great rocks of Gyrae; nevertheless, he let him get safeout of the water, and in spite of all Minerva’s hatred he would haveescaped death, if he had not ruined himself by boasting. He said thegods could not drown him even though they had tried to do so, and whenNeptune heard this large talk, he seized his trident in his two brawnyhands, and split the rock of Gyrae in two pieces. The base remainedwhere it was, but the part on which Ajax was sitting fell headlong intothe sea and carried Ajax with it; so he drank salt water and wasdrowned.“‘Your brother and his ships escaped, for Juno protected him, but whenhe was just about to reach the high promontory of Malea, he was caughtby a heavy gale which carried him out to sea again sorely against hiswill, and drove him to the foreland where Thyestes used to dwell, butwhere Aegisthus was then living. By and by, however, it seemed asthough he was to return safely after all, for the gods backed the windinto its old quarter and they reached home; whereon Agamemnon kissedhis native soil, and shed tears of joy at finding himself in his owncountry.“‘Now there was a watchman whom Aegisthus kept always on the watch, andto whom he had promised two talents of gold. This man had been lookingout for a whole year to make sure that Agamemnon did not give him theslip and prepare war; when, therefore, this man saw Agamemnon go by, hewent and told Aegisthus, who at once began to lay a plot for him. Hepicked twenty of his bravest warriors and placed them in ambuscade onone side the cloister, while on the opposite side he prepared abanquet. Then he sent his chariots and horsemen to Agamemnon, andinvited him to the feast, but he meant foul play. He got him there, allunsuspicious of the doom that was awaiting him, and killed him when thebanquet was over as though he were butchering an ox in the shambles;not one of Agamemnon’s followers was left alive, nor yet one ofAegisthus’, but they were all killed there in the cloisters.’“Thus spoke Proteus, and I was broken hearted as I heard him. I satdown upon the sands and wept; I felt as though I could no longer bearto live nor look upon the light of the sun. Presently, when I had hadmy fill of weeping and writhing upon the ground, the old man of the seasaid, ‘Son of Atreus, do not waste any more time in crying so bitterly;it can do no manner of good; find your way home as fast as ever youcan, for Aegisthus may be still alive, and even though Orestes has beenbeforehand with you in killing him, you may yet come in for hisfuneral.’“On this I took comfort in spite of all my sorrow, and said, ‘I know,then, about these two; tell me, therefore, about the third man of whomyou spoke; is he still alive, but at sea, and unable to get home? or ishe dead? Tell me, no matter how much it may grieve me.’“‘The third man,’ he answered, ‘is Ulysses who dwells in Ithaca. I cansee him in an island sorrowing bitterly in the house of the nymphCalypso, who is keeping him prisoner, and he cannot reach his home forhe has no ships nor sailors to take him over the sea. As for your ownend, Menelaus, you shall not die in Argos, but the gods will take youto the Elysian plain, which is at the ends of the world. Therefair-haired Rhadamanthus reigns, and men lead an easier life than anywhere else in the world, for in Elysium there falls not rain, nor hail,nor snow, but Oceanus breathes ever with a West wind that sings softlyfrom the sea, and gives fresh life to all men. This will happen to youbecause you have married Helen, and are Jove’s son-in-law.’“As he spoke he dived under the waves, whereon I turned back to theships with my companions, and my heart was clouded with care as I wentalong. When we reached the ships we got supper ready, for night wasfalling, and camped down upon the beach. When the child of morning,rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, we drew our ships into the water, and putour masts and sails within them; then we went on board ourselves, tookour seats on the benches, and smote the grey sea with our oars. I againstationed my ships in the heaven-fed stream of Egypt, and offeredhecatombs that were full and sufficient. When I had thus appeasedheaven’s anger, I raised a barrow to the memory of Agamemnon that hisname might live for ever, after which I had a quick passage home, forthe gods sent me a fair wind.“And now for yourself—stay here some ten or twelve days longer, and Iwill then speed you on your way. I will make you a noble present of achariot and three horses. I will also give you a beautiful chalice thatso long as you live you may think of me whenever you make adrink-offering to the immortal gods.”“Son of Atreus,” replied Telemachus, “do not press me to stay longer; Ishould be contented to remain with you for another twelve months; Ifind your conversation so delightful that I should never once wishmyself at home with my parents; but my crew whom I have left at Pylosare already impatient, and you are detaining me from them. As for anypresent you may be disposed to make me, I had rather that it should bea piece of plate. I will take no horses back with me to Ithaca, butwill leave them to adorn your own stables, for you have much flatground in your kingdom where lotus thrives, as also meadow-sweet andwheat and barley, and oats with their white and spreading ears; whereasin Ithaca we have neither open fields nor racecourses, and the countryis more fit for goats than horses, and I like it the better for that.48 None of our islands have much level ground, suitable for horses, andIthaca least of all.”Menelaus smiled and took Telemachus’s hand within his own. “What yousay,” said he, “shows that you come of good family. I both can, andwill, make this exchange for you, by giving you the finest and mostprecious piece of plate in all my house. It is a mixing bowl byVulcan’s own hand, of pure silver, except the rim, which is inlaid withgold. Phaedimus, king of the Sidonians, gave it me in the course of avisit which I paid him when I returned thither on my homeward journey.I will make you a present of it.”Thus did they converse [and guests kept coming to the king’s house.They brought sheep and wine, while their wives had put up bread forthem to take with them; so they were busy cooking their dinners in thecourts].49Meanwhile the suitors were throwing discs or aiming with spears at amark on the levelled ground in front of Ulysses’ house, and werebehaving with all their old insolence. Antinous and Eurymachus, whowere their ringleaders and much the foremost among them all, weresitting together when Noemon son of Phronius came up and said toAntinous,“Have we any idea, Antinous, on what day Telemachus returns from Pylos?He has a ship of mine, and I want it, to cross over to Elis: I havetwelve brood mares there with yearling mule foals by their side not yetbroken in, and I want to bring one of them over here and break him.”They were astounded when they heard this, for they had made sure thatTelemachus had not gone to the city of Neleus. They thought he was onlyaway somewhere on the farms, and was with the sheep, or with theswineherd; so Antinous said, “When did he go? Tell me truly, and whatyoung men did he take with him? Were they freemen or his ownbondsmen—for he might manage that too? Tell me also, did you let himhave the ship of your own free will because he asked you, or did hetake it without your leave?”“I lent it him,” answered Noemon, “what else could I do when a man ofhis position said he was in a difficulty, and asked me to oblige him? Icould not possibly refuse. As for those who went with him they were thebest young men we have, and I saw Mentor go on board as captain—or somegod who was exactly like him. I cannot understand it, for I saw Mentorhere myself yesterday morning, and yet he was then setting out forPylos.”Noemon then went back to his father’s house, but Antinous andEurymachus were very angry. They told the others to leave off playing,and to come and sit down along with themselves. When they came,Antinous son of Eupeithes spoke in anger. His heart was black withrage, and his eyes flashed fire as he said:“Good heavens, this voyage of Telemachus is a very serious matter; wehad made sure that it would come to nothing, but the young fellow hasgot away in spite of us, and with a picked crew too. He will be givingus trouble presently; may Jove take him before he is full grown. Findme a ship, therefore, with a crew of twenty men, and I will lie in waitfor him in the straits between Ithaca and Samos; he will then rue theday that he set out to try and get news of his father.”Thus did he speak, and the others applauded his saying; they then allof them went inside the buildings.It was not long ere Penelope came to know what the suitors wereplotting; for a man servant, Medon, overheard them from outside theouter court as they were laying their schemes within, and went to tellhis mistress. As he crossed the threshold of her room Penelope said:“Medon, what have the suitors sent you here for? Is it to tell themaids to leave their master’s business and cook dinner for them? I wishthey may neither woo nor dine henceforward, neither here nor anywhereelse, but let this be the very last time, for the waste you all make ofmy son’s estate. Did not your fathers tell you when you were children,how good Ulysses had been to them—never doing anything high-handed, norspeaking harshly to anybody? Kings may say things sometimes, and theymay take a fancy to one man and dislike another, but Ulysses never didan unjust thing by anybody—which shows what bad hearts you have, andthat there is no such thing as gratitude left in this world.”Then Medon said, “I wish, Madam, that this were all; but they areplotting something much more dreadful now—may heaven frustrate theirdesign. They are going to try and murder Telemachus as he is cominghome from Pylos and Lacedaemon, where he has been to get news of hisfather.”Then Penelope’s heart sank within her, and for a long time she wasspeechless; her eyes filled with tears, and she could find noutterance. At last, however, she said, “Why did my son leave me? Whatbusiness had he to go sailing off in ships that make long voyages overthe ocean like sea-horses? Does he want to die without leaving any onebehind him to keep up his name?”“I do not know,” answered Medon, “whether some god set him on to it, orwhether he went on his own impulse to see if he could find out if hisfather was dead, or alive and on his way home.”Then he went downstairs again, leaving Penelope in an agony of grief.There were plenty of seats in the house, but she had no heart forsitting on any one of them; she could only fling herself on the floorof her own room and cry; whereon all the maids in the house, both oldand young, gathered round her and began to cry too, till at last in atransport of sorrow she exclaimed,“My dears, heaven has been pleased to try me with more affliction thanany other woman of my age and country. First I lost my brave andlion-hearted husband, who had every good quality under heaven, andwhose name was great over all Hellas and middle Argos, and now mydarling son is at the mercy of the winds and waves, without my havingheard one word about his leaving home. You hussies, there was not oneof you would so much as think of giving me a call out of my bed, thoughyou all of you very well knew when he was starting. If I had known hemeant taking this voyage, he would have had to give it up, no matterhow much he was bent upon it, or leave me a corpse behind him—one orother. Now, however, go some of you and call old Dolius, who was givenme by my father on my marriage, and who is my gardener. Bid him go atonce and tell everything to Laertes, who may be able to hit on someplan for enlisting public sympathy on our side, as against those whoare trying to exterminate his own race and that of Ulysses.”Then the dear old nurse Euryclea said, “You may kill me, Madam, or letme live on in your house, whichever you please, but I will tell you thereal truth. I knew all about it, and gave him everything he wanted inthe way of bread and wine, but he made me take my solemn oath that Iwould not tell you anything for some ten or twelve days, unless youasked or happened to hear of his having gone, for he did not want youto spoil your beauty by crying. And now, Madam, wash your face, changeyour dress, and go upstairs with your maids to offer prayers toMinerva, daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, for she can save him eventhough he be in the jaws of death. Do not trouble Laertes: he hastrouble enough already. Besides, I cannot think that the gods hate therace of the son of Arceisius so much, but there will be a son left tocome up after him, and inherit both the house and the fair fields thatlie far all round it.”With these words she made her mistress leave off crying, and dried thetears from her eyes. Penelope washed her face, changed her dress, andwent upstairs with her maids. She then put some bruised barley into abasket and began praying to Minerva.“Hear me,” she cried, “Daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable. Ifever Ulysses while he was here burned you fat thigh bones of sheep orheifer, bear it in mind now as in my favour, and save my darling sonfrom the villainy of the suitors.”She cried aloud as she spoke, and the goddess heard her prayer;meanwhile the suitors were clamorous throughout the covered cloister,and one of them said:“The queen is preparing for her marriage with one or other of us.Little does she dream that her son has now been doomed to die.”This was what they said, but they did not know what was going tohappen. Then Antinous said, “Comrades, let there be no loud talking,lest some of it get carried inside. Let us be up and do that insilence, about which we are all of a mind.”He then chose twenty men, and they went down to their ship and to thesea side; they drew the vessel into the water and got her mast andsails inside her; they bound the oars to the thole-pins with twistedthongs of leather, all in due course, and spread the white sails aloft,while their fine servants brought them their armour. Then they made theship fast a little way out, came on shore again, got their suppers, andwaited till night should fall.But Penelope lay in her own room upstairs unable to eat or drink, andwondering whether her brave son would escape, or be overpowered by thewicked suitors. Like a lioness caught in the toils with huntsmenhemming her in on every side she thought and thought till she sank intoa slumber, and lay on her bed bereft of thought and motion.Then Minerva bethought her of another matter, and made a vision in thelikeness of Penelope’s sister Iphthime daughter of Icarius who hadmarried Eumelus and lived in Pherae. She told the vision to go to thehouse of Ulysses, and to make Penelope leave off crying, so it cameinto her room by the hole through which the thong went for pulling thedoor to, and hovered over her head saying,“You are asleep, Penelope: the gods who live at ease will not sufferyou to weep and be so sad. Your son has done them no wrong, so he willyet come back to you.”Penelope, who was sleeping sweetly at the gates of dreamland, answered,“Sister, why have you come here? You do not come very often, but Isuppose that is because you live such a long way off. Am I, then, toleave off crying and refrain from all the sad thoughts that torture me?I, who have lost my brave and lion-hearted husband, who had every goodquality under heaven, and whose name was great over all Hellas andmiddle Argos; and now my darling son has gone off on board of a ship—afoolish fellow who has never been used to roughing it, nor to goingabout among gatherings of men. I am even more anxious about him thanabout my husband; I am all in a tremble when I think of him, lestsomething should happen to him, either from the people among whom hehas gone, or by sea, for he has many enemies who are plotting againsthim, and are bent on killing him before he can return home.”Then the vision said, “Take heart, and be not so much dismayed. Thereis one gone with him whom many a man would be glad enough to have standby his side, I mean Minerva; it is she who has compassion upon you, andwho has sent me to bear you this message.”“Then,” said Penelope, “if you are a god or have been sent here bydivine commission, tell me also about that other unhappy one—is hestill alive, or is he already dead and in the house of Hades?”And the vision said, “I shall not tell you for certain whether he isalive or dead, and there is no use in idle conversation.”Then it vanished through the thong-hole of the door and was dissipatedinto thin air; but Penelope rose from her sleep refreshed andcomforted, so vivid had been her dream.Meantime the suitors went on board and sailed their ways over the sea,intent on murdering Telemachus. Now there is a rocky islet calledAsteris, of no great size, in mid channel between Ithaca and Samos, andthere is a harbour on either side of it where a ship can lie. Here thenthe Achaeans placed themselves in ambush.BOOK VCALYPSO—ULYSSES REACHES SCHERIA ON A RAFT.And now, as Dawn rose from her couch beside Tithonus—harbinger of lightalike to mortals and immortals—the gods met in council and with them,Jove the lord of thunder, who is their king. Thereon Minerva began totell them of the many sufferings of Ulysses, for she pitied him awaythere in the house of the nymph Calypso.“Father Jove,” said she, “and all you other gods that live ineverlasting bliss, I hope there may never be such a thing as a kind andwell-disposed ruler any more, nor one who will govern equitably. I hopethey will be all henceforth cruel and unjust, for there is not one ofhis subjects but has forgotten Ulysses, who ruled them as though hewere their father. There he is, lying in great pain in an island wheredwells the nymph Calypso, who will not let him go; and he cannot getback to his own country, for he can find neither ships nor sailors totake him over the sea. Furthermore, wicked people are now trying tomurder his only son Telemachus, who is coming home from Pylos andLacedaemon, where he has been to see if he can get news of his father.”“What, my dear, are you talking about?” replied her father, “did younot send him there yourself, because you thought it would help Ulyssesto get home and punish the suitors? Besides, you are perfectly able toprotect Telemachus, and to see him safely home again, while the suitorshave to come hurry-skurrying back without having killed him.”When he had thus spoken, he said to his son Mercury, “Mercury, you areour messenger, go therefore and tell Calypso we have decreed that poorUlysses is to return home. He is to be convoyed neither by gods normen, but after a perilous voyage of twenty days upon a raft he is toreach fertile Scheria,50 the land of the Phaeacians, who are near ofkin to the gods, and will honour him as though he were one ofourselves. They will send him in a ship to his own country, and willgive him more bronze and gold and raiment than he would have broughtback from Troy, if he had had all his prize money and had got homewithout disaster. This is how we have settled that he shall return tohis country and his friends.”Thus he spoke, and Mercury, guide and guardian, slayer of Argus, did ashe was told. Forthwith he bound on his glittering golden sandals withwhich he could fly like the wind over land and sea. He took the wandwith which he seals men’s eyes in sleep or wakes them just as hepleases, and flew holding it in his hand over Pieria; then he swoopeddown through the firmament till he reached the level of the sea, whosewaves he skimmed like a cormorant that flies fishing every hole andcorner of the ocean, and drenching its thick plumage in the spray. Heflew and flew over many a weary wave, but when at last he got to theisland which was his journey’s end, he left the sea and went on by landtill he came to the cave where the nymph Calypso lived.He found her at home. There was a large fire burning on the hearth, andone could smell from far the fragrant reek of burning cedar and sandalwood. As for herself, she was busy at her loom, shooting her goldenshuttle through the warp and singing beautifully. Round her cave therewas a thick wood of alder, poplar, and sweet smelling cypress trees,wherein all kinds of great birds had built their nests—owls, hawks, andchattering sea-crows that occupy their business in the waters. A vineloaded with grapes was trained and grew luxuriantly about the mouth ofthe cave; there were also four running rills of water in channels cutpretty close together, and turned hither and thither so as to irrigatethe beds of violets and luscious herbage over which they flowed. 51Even a god could not help being charmed with such a lovely spot, soMercury stood still and looked at it; but when he had admired itsufficiently he went inside the cave.Calypso knew him at once—for the gods all know each other, no matterhow far they live from one another—but Ulysses was not within; he wason the sea-shore as usual, looking out upon the barren ocean with tearsin his eyes, groaning and breaking his heart for sorrow. Calypso gaveMercury a seat and said: “Why have you come to see me,Mercury—honoured, and ever welcome—for you do not visit me often? Saywhat you want; I will do it for you at once if I can, and if it can bedone at all; but come inside, and let me set refreshment before you.”As she spoke she drew a table loaded with ambrosia beside him and mixedhim some red nectar, so Mercury ate and drank till he had had enough,and then said:“We are speaking god and goddess to one another, and you ask me why Ihave come here, and I will tell you truly as you would have me do. Jovesent me; it was no doing of mine; who could possibly want to come allthis way over the sea where there are no cities full of people to offerme sacrifices or choice hecatombs? Nevertheless I had to come, for noneof us other gods can cross Jove, nor transgress his orders. He saysthat you have here the most ill-starred of all those who fought nineyears before the city of King Priam and sailed home in the tenth yearafter having sacked it. On their way home they sinned againstMinerva,52 who raised both wind and waves against them, so that all hisbrave companions perished, and he alone was carried hither by wind andtide. Jove says that you are to let this man go at once, for it isdecreed that he shall not perish here, far from his own people, butshall return to his house and country and see his friends again.”Calypso trembled with rage when she heard this, “You gods,” sheexclaimed, “ought to be ashamed of yourselves. You are always jealousand hate seeing a goddess take a fancy to a mortal man, and live withhim in open matrimony. So when rosy-fingered Dawn made love to Orion,you precious gods were all of you furious till Diana went and killedhim in Ortygia. So again when Ceres fell in love with Iasion, andyielded to him in a thrice-ploughed fallow field, Jove came to hear ofit before so very long and killed Iasion with his thunderbolts. And nowyou are angry with me too because I have a man here. I found the poorcreature sitting all alone astride of a keel, for Jove had struck hisship with lightning and sunk it in mid ocean, so that all his crew weredrowned, while he himself was driven by wind and waves on to my island.I got fond of him and cherished him, and had set my heart on making himimmortal, so that he should never grow old all his days; still I cannotcross Jove, nor bring his counsels to nothing; therefore, if he insistsupon it, let the man go beyond the seas again; but I cannot send himanywhere myself for I have neither ships nor men who can take him.Nevertheless I will readily give him such advice, in all good faith, aswill be likely to bring him safely to his own country.”“Then send him away,” said Mercury, “or Jove will be angry with you andpunish you”.On this he took his leave, and Calypso went out to look for Ulysses,for she had heard Jove’s message. She found him sitting upon the beachwith his eyes ever filled with tears, and dying of sheer home sickness;for he had got tired of Calypso, and though he was forced to sleep withher in the cave by night, it was she, not he, that would have it so. Asfor the day time, he spent it on the rocks and on the sea shore,weeping, crying aloud for his despair, and always looking out upon thesea. Calypso then went close up to him said:“My poor fellow, you shall not stay here grieving and fretting yourlife out any longer. I am going to send you away of my own free will;so go, cut some beams of wood, and make yourself a large raft with anupper deck that it may carry you safely over the sea. I will put bread,wine, and water on board to save you from starving. I will also giveyou clothes, and will send you a fair wind to take you home, if thegods in heaven so will it—for they know more about these things, andcan settle them better than I can.”Ulysses shuddered as he heard her. “Now goddess,” he answered, “thereis something behind all this; you cannot be really meaning to help mehome when you bid me do such a dreadful thing as put to sea on a raft.Not even a well found ship with a fair wind could venture on such adistant voyage: nothing that you can say or do shall make me go onboard a raft unless you first solemnly swear that you mean me nomischief.”Calypso smiled at this and caressed him with her hand: “You know agreat deal,” said she, “but you are quite wrong here. May heaven aboveand earth below be my witnesses, with the waters of the river Styx—andthis is the most solemn oath which a blessed god can take—that I meanyou no sort of harm, and am only advising you to do exactly what Ishould do myself in your place. I am dealing with you quitestraightforwardly; my heart is not made of iron, and I am very sorryfor you.”When she had thus spoken she led the way rapidly before him, andUlysses followed in her steps; so the pair, goddess and man, went onand on till they came to Calypso’s cave, where Ulysses took the seatthat Mercury had just left. Calypso set meat and drink before him ofthe food that mortals eat; but her maids brought ambrosia and nectarfor herself, and they laid their hands on the good things that werebefore them. When they had satisfied themselves with meat and drink,Calypso spoke, saying:“Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, so you would start home to your ownland at once? Good luck go with you, but if you could only know howmuch suffering is in store for you before you get back to your owncountry, you would stay where you are, keep house along with me, andlet me make you immortal, no matter how anxious you may be to see thiswife of yours, of whom you are thinking all the time day after day; yetI flatter myself that I am no whit less tall or well-looking than sheis, for it is not to be expected that a mortal woman should compare inbeauty with an immortal.”“Goddess,” replied Ulysses, “do not be angry with me about this. I amquite aware that my wife Penelope is nothing like so tall or sobeautiful as yourself. She is only a woman, whereas you are animmortal. Nevertheless, I want to get home, and can think of nothingelse. If some god wrecks me when I am on the sea, I will bear it andmake the best of it. I have had infinite trouble both by land and seaalready, so let this go with the rest.”Presently the sun set and it became dark, whereon the pair retired intothe inner part of the cave and went to bed.When the child of morning rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, Ulysses put onhis shirt and cloak, while the goddess wore a dress of a light gossamerfabric, very fine and graceful, with a beautiful golden girdle abouther waist and a veil to cover her head. She at once set herself tothink how she could speed Ulysses on his way. So she gave him a greatbronze axe that suited his hands; it was sharpened on both sides, andhad a beautiful olive-wood handle fitted firmly on to it. She also gavehim a sharp adze, and then led the way to the far end of the islandwhere the largest trees grew—alder, poplar and pine, that reached thesky—very dry and well seasoned, so as to sail light for him in thewater.53 Then, when she had shown him where the best trees grew,Calypso went home, leaving him to cut them, which he soon finisheddoing. He cut down twenty trees in all and adzed them smooth, squaringthem by rule in good workmanlike fashion. Meanwhile Calypso came backwith some augers, so he bored holes with them and fitted the timberstogether with bolts and rivets. He made the raft as broad as a skilledshipwright makes the beam of a large vessel, and he fixed a deck on topof the ribs, and ran a gunwale all round it. He also made a mast with ayard arm, and a rudder to steer with. He fenced the raft all round withwicker hurdles as a protection against the waves, and then he threw ona quantity of wood. By and by Calypso brought him some linen to makethe sails, and he made these too, excellently, making them fast withbraces and sheets. Last of all, with the help of levers, he drew theraft down into the water.In four days he had completed the whole work, and on the fifth Calypsosent him from the island after washing him and giving him some cleanclothes. She gave him a goat skin full of black wine, and anotherlarger one of water; she also gave him a wallet full of provisions, andfound him in much good meat. Moreover, she made the wind fair and warmfor him, and gladly did Ulysses spread his sail before it, while he satand guided the raft skilfully by means of the rudder. He never closedhis eyes, but kept them fixed on the Pleiads, on late-setting Bootes,and on the Bear—which men also call the wain, and which turns round andround where it is, facing Orion, and alone never dipping into thestream of Oceanus—for Calypso had told him to keep this to his left.Days seven and ten did he sail over the sea, and on the eighteenth thedim outlines of the mountains on the nearest part of the Phaeaciancoast appeared, rising like a shield on the horizon.But King Neptune, who was returning from the Ethiopians, caught sightof Ulysses a long way off, from the mountains of the Solymi. He couldsee him sailing upon the sea, and it made him very angry, so he waggedhis head and muttered to himself, saying, “Good heavens, so the godshave been changing their minds about Ulysses while I was away inEthiopia, and now he is close to the land of the Phaeacians, where itis decreed that he shall escape from the calamities that have befallenhim. Still, he shall have plenty of hardship yet before he has donewith it.”Thereon he gathered his clouds together, grasped his trident, stirredit round in the sea, and roused the rage of every wind that blows tillearth, sea, and sky were hidden in cloud, and night sprang forth out ofthe heavens. Winds from East, South, North, and West fell upon him allat the same time, and a tremendous sea got up, so that Ulysses’ heartbegan to fail him. “Alas,” he said to himself in his dismay, “what everwill become of me? I am afraid Calypso was right when she said I shouldhave trouble by sea before I got back home. It is all coming true. Howblack is Jove making heaven with his clouds, and what a sea the windsare raising from every quarter at once. I am now safe to perish. Blestand thrice blest were those Danaans who fell before Troy in the causeof the sons of Atreus. Would that I had been killed on the day when theTrojans were pressing me so sorely about the dead body of Achilles, forthen I should have had due burial and the Achaeans would have honouredmy name; but now it seems that I shall come to a most pitiable end.”As he spoke a sea broke over him with such terrific fury that the raftreeled again, and he was carried overboard a long way off. He let gothe helm, and the force of the hurricane was so great that it broke themast half way up, and both sail and yard went over into the sea. For along time Ulysses was under water, and it was all he could do to riseto the surface again, for the clothes Calypso had given him weighed himdown; but at last he got his head above water and spat out the bitterbrine that was running down his face in streams. In spite of all this,however, he did not lose sight of his raft, but swam as fast as hecould towards it, got hold of it, and climbed on board again so as toescape drowning. The sea took the raft and tossed it about as Autumnwinds whirl thistledown round and round upon a road. It was as thoughthe South, North, East, and West winds were all playing battledore andshuttlecock with it at once.When he was in this plight, Ino daughter of Cadmus, also calledLeucothea, saw him. She had formerly been a mere mortal, but had beensince raised to the rank of a marine goddess. Seeing in what greatdistress Ulysses now was, she had compassion upon him, and, rising likea sea-gull from the waves, took her seat upon the raft.“My poor good man,” said she, “why is Neptune so furiously angry withyou? He is giving you a great deal of trouble, but for all his blusterhe will not kill you. You seem to be a sensible person, do then as Ibid you; strip, leave your raft to drive before the wind, and swim tothe Phaeacian coast where better luck awaits you. And here, take myveil and put it round your chest; it is enchanted, and you can come tono harm so long as you wear it. As soon as you touch land take it off,throw it back as far as you can into the sea, and then go away again.”With these words she took off her veil and gave it him. Then she diveddown again like a sea-gull and vanished beneath the dark blue waters.But Ulysses did not know what to think. “Alas,” he said to himself inhis dismay, “this is only some one or other of the gods who is luringme to ruin by advising me to quit my raft. At any rate I will not do soat present, for the land where she said I should be quit of alltroubles seemed to be still a good way off. I know what I will do—I amsure it will be best—no matter what happens I will stick to the raft aslong as her timbers hold together, but when the sea breaks her up Iwill swim for it; I do not see how I can do any better than this.”While he was thus in two minds, Neptune sent a terrible great wave thatseemed to rear itself above his head till it broke right over the raft,which then went to pieces as though it were a heap of dry chaff tossedabout by a whirlwind. Ulysses got astride of one plank and rode upon itas if he were on horseback; he then took off the clothes Calypso hadgiven him, bound Ino’s veil under his arms, and plunged into thesea—meaning to swim on shore. King Neptune watched him as he did so,and wagged his head, muttering to himself and saying, “There now, swimup and down as you best can till you fall in with well-to-do people. Ido not think you will be able to say that I have let you off toolightly.” On this he lashed his horses and drove to Aegae where hispalace is.But Minerva resolved to help Ulysses, so she bound the ways of all thewinds except one, and made them lie quite still; but she roused a goodstiff breeze from the North that should lay the waters till Ulyssesreached the land of the Phaeacians where he would be safe.Thereon he floated about for two nights and two days in the water, witha heavy swell on the sea and death staring him in the face; but whenthe third day broke, the wind fell and there was a dead calm without somuch as a breath of air stirring. As he rose on the swell he lookedeagerly ahead, and could see land quite near. Then, as children rejoicewhen their dear father begins to get better after having for a longtime borne sore affliction sent him by some angry spirit, but the godsdeliver him from evil, so was Ulysses thankful when he again saw landand trees, and swam on with all his strength that he might once moreset foot upon dry ground. When, however, he got within earshot, hebegan to hear the surf thundering up against the rocks, for the swellstill broke against them with a terrific roar. Everything was envelopedin spray; there were no harbours where a ship might ride, nor shelterof any kind, but only headlands, low-lying rocks, and mountain tops.Ulysses’ heart now began to fail him, and he said despairingly tohimself, “Alas, Jove has let me see land after swimming so far that Ihad given up all hope, but I can find no landing place, for the coastis rocky and surf-beaten, the rocks are smooth and rise sheer from thesea, with deep water close under them so that I cannot climb out forwant of foot hold. I am afraid some great wave will lift me off my legsand dash me against the rocks as I leave the water—which would give mea sorry landing. If, on the other hand, I swim further in search ofsome shelving beach or harbour, a hurricane may carry me out to seaagain sorely against my will, or heaven may send some great monster ofthe deep to attack me; for Amphitrite breeds many such, and I know thatNeptune is very angry with me.”While he was thus in two minds a wave caught him and took him with suchforce against the rocks that he would have been smashed and torn topieces if Minerva had not shown him what to do. He caught hold of therock with both hands and clung to it groaning with pain till the waveretired, so he was saved that time; but presently the wave came onagain and carried him back with it far into the sea—tearing his handsas the suckers of a polypus are torn when some one plucks it from itsbed, and the stones come up along with it—even so did the rocks tearthe skin from his strong hands, and then the wave drew him deep downunder the water.Here poor Ulysses would have certainly perished even in spite of hisown destiny, if Minerva had not helped him to keep his wits about him.He swam seaward again, beyond reach of the surf that was beatingagainst the land, and at the same time he kept looking towards theshore to see if he could find some haven, or a spit that should takethe waves aslant. By and by, as he swam on, he came to the mouth of ariver, and here he thought would be the best place, for there were norocks, and it afforded shelter from the wind. He felt that there was acurrent, so he prayed inwardly and said:“Hear me, O King, whoever you may be, and save me from the anger of thesea-god Neptune, for I approach you prayerfully. Any one who has losthis way has at all times a claim even upon the gods, wherefore in mydistress I draw near to your stream, and cling to the knees of yourriverhood. Have mercy upon me, O king, for I declare myself yoursuppliant.”Then the god staid his stream and stilled the waves, making all calmbefore him, and bringing him safely into the mouth of the river. Hereat last Ulysses’ knees and strong hands failed him, for the sea hadcompletely broken him. His body was all swollen, and his mouth andnostrils ran down like a river with sea-water, so that he could neitherbreathe nor speak, and lay swooning from sheer exhaustion; presently,when he had got his breath and came to himself again, he took off thescarf that Ino had given him and threw it back into the salt54 streamof the river, whereon Ino received it into her hands from the wave thatbore it towards her. Then he left the river, laid himself down amongthe rushes, and kissed the bounteous earth.“Alas,” he cried to himself in his dismay, “what ever will become ofme, and how is it all to end? If I stay here upon the river bed throughthe long watches of the night, I am so exhausted that the bitter coldand damp may make an end of me—for towards sunrise there will be a keenwind blowing from off the river. If, on the other hand, I climb thehill side, find shelter in the woods, and sleep in some thicket, I mayescape the cold and have a good night’s rest, but some savage beast maytake advantage of me and devour me.”In the end he deemed it best to take to the woods, and he found oneupon some high ground not far from the water. There he crept beneathtwo shoots of olive that grew from a single stock—the one an ungraftedsucker, while the other had been grafted. No wind, however squally,could break through the cover they afforded, nor could the sun’s rayspierce them, nor the rain get through them, so closely did they growinto one another. Ulysses crept under these and began to make himself abed to lie on, for there was a great litter of dead leaves lyingabout—enough to make a covering for two or three men even in hardwinter weather. He was glad enough to see this, so he laid himself downand heaped the leaves all round him. Then, as one who lives alone inthe country, far from any neighbor, hides a brand as fire-seed in theashes to save himself from having to get a light elsewhere, even so didUlysses cover himself up with leaves; and Minerva shed a sweet sleepupon his eyes, closed his eyelids, and made him lose all memories ofhis sorrows.BOOK VITHE MEETING BETWEEN NAUSICAA AND ULYSSES.So here Ulysses slept, overcome by sleep and toil; but Minerva went offto the country and city of the Phaeacians—a people who used to live inthe fair town of Hypereia, near the lawless Cyclopes. Now the Cyclopeswere stronger than they and plundered them, so their king Nausithousmoved them thence and settled them in Scheria, far from all otherpeople. He surrounded the city with a wall, built houses and temples,and divided the lands among his people; but he was dead and gone to thehouse of Hades, and King Alcinous, whose counsels were inspired ofheaven, was now reigning. To his house, then, did Minerva hie infurtherance of the return of Ulysses.She went straight to the beautifully decorated bedroom in which thereslept a girl who was as lovely as a goddess, Nausicaa, daughter to KingAlcinous. Two maid servants were sleeping near her, both very pretty,one on either side of the doorway, which was closed with well madefolding doors. Minerva took the form of the famous sea captain Dymas’sdaughter, who was a bosom friend of Nausicaa and just her own age;then, coming up to the girl’s bedside like a breath of wind, shehovered over her head and said:“Nausicaa, what can your mother have been about, to have such a lazydaughter? Here are your clothes all lying in disorder, yet you aregoing to be married almost immediately, and should not only be welldressed yourself, but should find good clothes for those who attendyou. This is the way to get yourself a good name, and to make yourfather and mother proud of you. Suppose, then, that we make tomorrow awashing day, and start at daybreak. I will come and help you so thatyou may have everything ready as soon as possible, for all the bestyoung men among your own people are courting you, and you are not goingto remain a maid much longer. Ask your father, therefore, to have awaggon and mules ready for us at daybreak, to take the rugs, robes, andgirdles, and you can ride, too, which will be much pleasanter for youthan walking, for the washing-cisterns are some way from the town.”When she had said this Minerva went away to Olympus, which they say isthe everlasting home of the gods. Here no wind beats roughly, andneither rain nor snow can fall; but it abides in everlasting sunshineand in a great peacefulness of light, wherein the blessed gods areillumined for ever and ever. This was the place to which the goddesswent when she had given instructions to the girl.By and by morning came and woke Nausicaa, who began wondering about herdream; she therefore went to the other end of the house to tell herfather and mother all about it, and found them in their own room. Hermother was sitting by the fireside spinning her purple yarn with hermaids around her, and she happened to catch her father just as he wasgoing out to attend a meeting of the town council, which the Phaeacianaldermen had convened. She stopped him and said:“Papa dear, could you manage to let me have a good big waggon? I wantto take all our dirty clothes to the river and wash them. You are thechief man here, so it is only right that you should have a clean shirtwhen you attend meetings of the council. Moreover, you have five sonsat home, two of them married, while the other three are good lookingbachelors; you know they always like to have clean linen when they goto a dance, and I have been thinking about all this.”She did not say a word about her own wedding, for she did not like to,but her father knew and said, “You shall have the mules, my love, andwhatever else you have a mind for. Be off with you, and the men shallget you a good strong waggon with a body to it that will hold all yourclothes.”On this he gave his orders to the servants, who got the waggon out,harnessed the mules, and put them to, while the girl brought theclothes down from the linen room and placed them on the waggon. Hermother prepared her a basket of provisions with all sorts of goodthings, and a goat skin full of wine; the girl now got into the waggon,and her mother gave her also a golden cruse of oil, that she and herwomen might anoint themselves. Then she took the whip and reins andlashed the mules on, whereon they set off, and their hoofs clattered onthe road. They pulled without flagging, and carried not only Nausicaaand her wash of clothes, but the maids also who were with her.When they reached the water side they went to the washing cisterns,through which there ran at all times enough pure water to wash anyquantity of linen, no matter how dirty. Here they unharnessed the mulesand turned them out to feed on the sweet juicy herbage that grew by thewater side. They took the clothes out of the waggon, put them in thewater, and vied with one another in treading them in the pits to getthe dirt out. After they had washed them and got them quite clean, theylaid them out by the sea side, where the waves had raised a high beachof shingle, and set about washing themselves and anointing themselveswith olive oil. Then they got their dinner by the side of the stream,and waited for the sun to finish drying the clothes. When they had donedinner they threw off the veils that covered their heads and began toplay at ball, while Nausicaa sang for them. As the huntress Diana goesforth upon the mountains of Taygetus or Erymanthus to hunt wild boarsor deer, and the wood nymphs, daughters of Aegis-bearing Jove, taketheir sport along with her (then is Leto proud at seeing her daughterstand a full head taller than the others, and eclipse the loveliestamid a whole bevy of beauties), even so did the girl outshine herhandmaids.When it was time for them to start home, and they were folding theclothes and putting them into the waggon, Minerva began to consider howUlysses should wake up and see the handsome girl who was to conduct himto the city of the Phaeacians. The girl, therefore, threw a ball at oneof the maids, which missed her and fell into deep water. On this theyall shouted, and the noise they made woke Ulysses, who sat up in hisbed of leaves and began to wonder what it might all be.“Alas,” said he to himself, “what kind of people have I come amongst?Are they cruel, savage, and uncivilised, or hospitable and humane? Iseem to hear the voices of young women, and they sound like those ofthe nymphs that haunt mountain tops, or springs of rivers and meadowsof green grass. At any rate I am among a race of men and women. Let metry if I cannot manage to get a look at them.”As he said this he crept from under his bush, and broke off a boughcovered with thick leaves to hide his nakedness. He looked like somelion of the wilderness that stalks about exulting in his strength anddefying both wind and rain; his eyes glare as he prowls in quest ofoxen, sheep, or deer, for he is famished, and will dare break even intoa well fenced homestead, trying to get at the sheep—even such didUlysses seem to the young women, as he drew near to them all naked ashe was, for he was in great want. On seeing one so unkempt and sobegrimed with salt water, the others scampered off along the spits thatjutted out into the sea, but the daughter of Alcinous stood firm, forMinerva put courage into her heart and took away all fear from her. Shestood right in front of Ulysses, and he doubted whether he should go upto her, throw himself at her feet, and embrace her knees as asuppliant, or stay where he was and entreat her to give him someclothes and show him the way to the town. In the end he deemed it bestto entreat her from a distance in case the girl should take offence athis coming near enough to clasp her knees, so he addressed her inhoneyed and persuasive language.“O queen,” he said, “I implore your aid—but tell me, are you a goddessor are you a mortal woman? If you are a goddess and dwell in heaven, Ican only conjecture that you are Jove’s daughter Diana, for your faceand figure resemble none but hers; if on the other hand you are amortal and live on earth, thrice happy are your father andmother—thrice happy, too, are your brothers and sisters; how proud anddelighted they must feel when they see so fair a scion as yourselfgoing out to a dance; most happy, however, of all will he be whosewedding gifts have been the richest, and who takes you to his own home.I never yet saw any one so beautiful, neither man nor woman, and amlost in admiration as I behold you. I can only compare you to a youngpalm tree which I saw when I was at Delos growing near the altar ofApollo—for I was there, too, with much people after me, when I was onthat journey which has been the source of all my troubles. Never yetdid such a young plant shoot out of the ground as that was, and Iadmired and wondered at it exactly as I now admire and wonder atyourself. I dare not clasp your knees, but I am in great distress;yesterday made the twentieth day that I had been tossing about upon thesea. The winds and waves have taken me all the way from the Ogygianisland,55 and now fate has flung me upon this coast that I may endurestill further suffering; for I do not think that I have yet come to theend of it, but rather that heaven has still much evil in store for me.“And now, O queen, have pity upon me, for you are the first person Ihave met, and I know no one else in this country. Show me the way toyour town, and let me have anything that you may have brought hither towrap your clothes in. May heaven grant you in all things your heart’sdesire—husband, house, and a happy, peaceful home; for there is nothingbetter in this world than that man and wife should be of one mind in ahouse. It discomfits their enemies, makes the hearts of their friendsglad, and they themselves know more about it than any one.”To this Nausicaa answered, “Stranger, you appear to be a sensible,well-disposed person. There is no accounting for luck; Jove givesprosperity to rich and poor just as he chooses, so you must take whathe has seen fit to send you, and make the best of it. Now, however,that you have come to this our country, you shall not want for clothesnor for anything else that a foreigner in distress may reasonably lookfor. I will show you the way to the town, and will tell you the name ofour people; we are called Phaeacians, and I am daughter to Alcinous, inwhom the whole power of the state is vested.”Then she called her maids and said, “Stay where you are, you girls. Canyou not see a man without running away from him? Do you take him for arobber or a murderer? Neither he nor any one else can come here to dous Phaeacians any harm, for we are dear to the gods, and live apart ona land’s end that juts into the sounding sea, and have nothing to dowith any other people. This is only some poor man who has lost his way,and we must be kind to him, for strangers and foreigners in distressare under Jove’s protection, and will take what they can get and bethankful; so, girls, give the poor fellow something to eat and drink,and wash him in the stream at some place that is sheltered from thewind.”On this the maids left off running away and began calling one anotherback. They made Ulysses sit down in the shelter as Nausicaa had toldthem, and brought him a shirt and cloak. They also brought him thelittle golden cruse of oil, and told him to go and wash in the stream.But Ulysses said, “Young women, please to stand a little on one sidethat I may wash the brine from my shoulders and anoint myself with oil,for it is long enough since my skin has had a drop of oil upon it. Icannot wash as long as you all keep standing there. I am ashamed tostrip56 before a number of good looking young women.”Then they stood on one side and went to tell the girl, while Ulysseswashed himself in the stream and scrubbed the brine from his back andfrom his broad shoulders. When he had thoroughly washed himself, andhad got the brine out of his hair, he anointed himself with oil, andput on the clothes which the girl had given him; Minerva then made himlook taller and stronger than before, she also made the hair grow thickon the top of his head, and flow down in curls like hyacinth blossoms;she glorified him about the head and shoulders as a skilful workman whohas studied art of all kinds under Vulcan and Minerva enriches a pieceof silver plate by gilding it—and his work is full of beauty. Then hewent and sat down a little way off upon the beach, looking quite youngand handsome, and the girl gazed on him with admiration; then she saidto her maids:“Hush, my dears, for I want to say something. I believe the gods wholive in heaven have sent this man to the Phaeacians. When I first sawhim I thought him plain, but now his appearance is like that of thegods who dwell in heaven. I should like my future husband to be justsuch another as he is, if he would only stay here and not want to goaway. However, give him something to eat and drink.”They did as they were told, and set food before Ulysses, who ate anddrank ravenously, for it was long since he had had food of any kind.Meanwhile, Nausicaa bethought her of another matter. She got the linenfolded and placed in the waggon, she then yoked the mules, and, as shetook her seat, she called Ulysses:“Stranger,” said she, “rise and let us be going back to the town; Iwill introduce you at the house of my excellent father, where I cantell you that you will meet all the best people among the Phaeacians.But be sure and do as I bid you, for you seem to be a sensible person.As long as we are going past the fields and farm lands, follow brisklybehind the waggon along with the maids and I will lead the way myself.Presently, however, we shall come to the town, where you will find ahigh wall running all round it, and a good harbour on either side witha narrow entrance into the city, and the ships will be drawn up by theroad side, for every one has a place where his own ship can lie. Youwill see the market place with a temple of Neptune in the middle of it,and paved with large stones bedded in the earth. Here people deal inship’s gear of all kinds, such as cables and sails, and here, too, arethe places where oars are made, for the Phaeacians are not a nation ofarchers; they know nothing about bows and arrows, but are a sea-faringfolk, and pride themselves on their masts, oars, and ships, with whichthey travel far over the sea.“I am afraid of the gossip and scandal that may be set on foot againstme later on; for the people here are very ill-natured, and some lowfellow, if he met us, might say, ‘Who is this fine-looking strangerthat is going about with Nausicaa? Where did she find him? I supposeshe is going to marry him. Perhaps he is a vagabond sailor whom she hastaken from some foreign vessel, for we have no neighbours; or some godhas at last come down from heaven in answer to her prayers, and she isgoing to live with him all the rest of her life. It would be a goodthing if she would take herself off and find a husband somewhere else,for she will not look at one of the many excellent young Phaeacians whoare in love with her.’ This is the kind of disparaging remark thatwould be made about me, and I could not complain, for I should myselfbe scandalised at seeing any other girl do the like, and go about withmen in spite of everybody, while her father and mother were stillalive, and without having been married in the face of all the world.“If, therefore, you want my father to give you an escort and to helpyou home, do as I bid you; you will see a beautiful grove of poplars bythe road side dedicated to Minerva; it has a well in it and a meadowall round it. Here my father has a field of rich garden ground, aboutas far from the town as a man’s voice will carry. Sit down there andwait for a while till the rest of us can get into the town and reach myfather’s house. Then, when you think we must have done this, come intothe town and ask the way to the house of my father Alcinous. You willhave no difficulty in finding it; any child will point it out to you,for no one else in the whole town has anything like such a fine houseas he has. When you have got past the gates and through the outercourt, go right across the inner court till you come to my mother. Youwill find her sitting by the fire and spinning her purple wool byfirelight. It is a fine sight to see her as she leans back against oneof the bearing-posts with her maids all ranged behind her. Close to herseat stands that of my father, on which he sits and topes like animmortal god. Never mind him, but go up to my mother, and lay yourhands upon her knees if you would get home quickly. If you can gain herover, you may hope to see your own country again, no matter how distantit may be.”So saying she lashed the mules with her whip and they left the river.The mules drew well, and their hoofs went up and down upon the road.She was careful not to go too fast for Ulysses and the maids who werefollowing on foot along with the waggon, so she plied her whip withjudgement. As the sun was going down they came to the sacred grove ofMinerva, and there Ulysses sat down and prayed to the mighty daughterof Jove.“Hear me,” he cried, “daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable, hearme now, for you gave no heed to my prayers when Neptune was wreckingme. Now, therefore, have pity upon me and grant that I may find friendsand be hospitably received by the Phaeacians.”Thus did he pray, and Minerva heard his prayer, but she would not showherself to him openly, for she was afraid of her uncle Neptune, who wasstill furious in his endeavors to prevent Ulysses from getting home.BOOK VIIRECEPTION OF ULYSSES AT THE PALACE OF KING ALCINOUS.Thus, then, did Ulysses wait and pray; but the girl drove on to thetown. When she reached her father’s house she drew up at the gateway,and her brothers—comely as the gods—gathered round her, took the mulesout of the waggon, and carried the clothes into the house, while shewent to her own room, where an old servant, Eurymedusa of Apeira, litthe fire for her. This old woman had been brought by sea from Apeira,and had been chosen as a prize for Alcinous because he was king overthe Phaeacians, and the people obeyed him as though he were a god.57She had been nurse to Nausicaa, and had now lit the fire for her, andbrought her supper for her into her own room.Presently Ulysses got up to go towards the town; and Minerva shed athick mist all round him to hide him in case any of the proudPhaeacians who met him should be rude to him, or ask him who he was.Then, as he was just entering the town, she came towards him in thelikeness of a little girl carrying a pitcher. She stood right in frontof him, and Ulysses said:“My dear, will you be so kind as to show me the house of king Alcinous?I am an unfortunate foreigner in distress, and do not know one in yourtown and country.”Then Minerva said, “Yes, father stranger, I will show you the house youwant, for Alcinous lives quite close to my own father. I will go beforeyou and show the way, but say not a word as you go, and do not look atany man, nor ask him questions; for the people here cannot abidestrangers, and do not like men who come from some other place. They area sea-faring folk, and sail the seas by the grace of Neptune in shipsthat glide along like thought, or as a bird in the air.”On this she led the way, and Ulysses followed in her steps; but not oneof the Phaeacians could see him as he passed through the city in themidst of them; for the great goddess Minerva in her good will towardshim had hidden him in a thick cloud of darkness. He admired theirharbours, ships, places of assembly, and the lofty walls of the city,which, with the palisade on top of them, were very striking, and whenthey reached the king’s house Minerva said:“This is the house, father stranger, which you would have me show you.You will find a number of great people sitting at table, but do not beafraid; go straight in, for the bolder a man is the more likely he isto carry his point, even though he is a stranger. First find the queen.Her name is Arete, and she comes of the same family as her husbandAlcinous. They both descend originally from Neptune, who was father toNausithous by Periboea, a woman of great beauty. Periboea was theyoungest daughter of Eurymedon, who at one time reigned over thegiants, but he ruined his ill-fated people and lost his own life toboot.“Neptune, however, lay with his daughter, and she had a son by him, thegreat Nausithous, who reigned over the Phaeacians. Nausithous had twosons Rhexenor and Alcinous;58 Apollo killed the first of them while hewas still a bridegroom and without male issue; but he left a daughterArete, whom Alcinous married, and honours as no other woman is honouredof all those that keep house along with their husbands.“Thus she both was, and still is, respected beyond measure by herchildren, by Alcinous himself, and by the whole people, who look uponher as a goddess, and greet her whenever she goes about the city, forshe is a thoroughly good woman both in head and heart, and when anywomen are friends of hers, she will help their husbands also to settletheir disputes. If you can gain her good will, you may have every hopeof seeing your friends again, and getting safely back to your home andcountry.”Then Minerva left Scheria and went away over the sea. She went toMarathon59 and to the spacious streets of Athens, where she entered theabode of Erechtheus; but Ulysses went on to the house of Alcinous, andhe pondered much as he paused a while before reaching the threshold ofbronze, for the splendour of the palace was like that of the sun ormoon. The walls on either side were of bronze from end to end, and thecornice was of blue enamel. The doors were gold, and hung on pillars ofsilver that rose from a floor of bronze, while the lintel was silverand the hook of the door was of gold.On either side there stood gold and silver mastiffs which Vulcan, withhis consummate skill, had fashioned expressly to keep watch over thepalace of king Alcinous; so they were immortal and could never growold. Seats were ranged all along the wall, here and there from one endto the other, with coverings of fine woven work which the women of thehouse had made. Here the chief persons of the Phaeacians used to sitand eat and drink, for there was abundance at all seasons; and therewere golden figures of young men with lighted torches in their hands,raised on pedestals, to give light by night to those who were at table.There are60 fifty maid servants in the house, some of whom are alwaysgrinding rich yellow grain at the mill, while others work at the loom,or sit and spin, and their shuttles go backwards and forwards like thefluttering of aspen leaves, while the linen is so closely woven that itwill turn oil. As the Phaeacians are the best sailors in the world, sotheir women excel all others in weaving, for Minerva has taught themall manner of useful arts, and they are very intelligent.Outside the gate of the outer court there is a large garden of aboutfour acres with a wall all round it. It is full of beautifultrees—pears, pomegranates, and the most delicious apples. There areluscious figs also, and olives in full growth. The fruits never rot norfail all the year round, neither winter nor summer, for the air is sosoft that a new crop ripens before the old has dropped. Pear grows onpear, apple on apple, and fig on fig, and so also with the grapes, forthere is an excellent vineyard: on the level ground of a part of this,the grapes are being made into raisins; in another part they are beinggathered; some are being trodden in the wine tubs, others further onhave shed their blossom and are beginning to show fruit, others againare just changing colour. In the furthest part of the ground there arebeautifully arranged beds of flowers that are in bloom all the yearround. Two streams go through it, the one turned in ducts throughoutthe whole garden, while the other is carried under the ground of theouter court to the house itself, and the town’s people draw water fromit. Such, then, were the splendours with which the gods had endowed thehouse of king Alcinous.So here Ulysses stood for a while and looked about him, but when he hadlooked long enough he crossed the threshold and went within theprecincts of the house. There he found all the chief people among thePhaeacians making their drink offerings to Mercury, which they alwaysdid the last thing before going away for the night.61 He went straightthrough the court, still hidden by the cloak of darkness in whichMinerva had enveloped him, till he reached Arete and King Alcinous;then he laid his hands upon the knees of the queen, and at that momentthe miraculous darkness fell away from him and he became visible. Everyone was speechless with surprise at seeing a man there, but Ulyssesbegan at once with his petition.“Queen Arete,” he exclaimed, “daughter of great Rhexenor, in mydistress I humbly pray you, as also your husband and these your guests(whom may heaven prosper with long life and happiness, and may theyleave their possessions to their children, and all the honoursconferred upon them by the state) to help me home to my own country assoon as possible; for I have been long in trouble and away from myfriends.”Then he sat down on the hearth among the ashes and they all held theirpeace, till presently the old hero Echeneus, who was an excellentspeaker and an elder among the Phaeacians, plainly and in all honestyaddressed them thus:“Alcinous,” said he, “it is not creditable to you that a strangershould be seen sitting among the ashes of your hearth; every one iswaiting to hear what you are about to say; tell him, then, to rise andtake a seat on a stool inlaid with silver, and bid your servants mixsome wine and water that we may make a drink offering to Jove the lordof thunder, who takes all well disposed suppliants under hisprotection; and let the housekeeper give him some supper, of whateverthere may be in the house.”When Alcinous heard this he took Ulysses by the hand, raised him fromthe hearth, and bade him take the seat of Laodamas, who had beensitting beside him, and was his favourite son. A maid servant thenbrought him water in a beautiful golden ewer and poured it into asilver basin for him to wash his hands, and she drew a clean tablebeside him; an upper servant brought him bread and offered him manygood things of what there was in the house, and Ulysses ate and drank.Then Alcinous said to one of the servants, “Pontonous, mix a cup ofwine and hand it round that we may make drink-offerings to Jove thelord of thunder, who is the protector of all well-disposed suppliants.”Pontonous then mixed wine and water, and handed it round after givingevery man his drink-offering. When they had made their offerings, andhad drunk each as much as he was minded, Alcinous said:“Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, hear my words. Youhave had your supper, so now go home to bed. To-morrow morning I shallinvite a still larger number of aldermen, and will give a sacrificialbanquet in honour of our guest; we can then discuss the question of hisescort, and consider how we may at once send him back rejoicing to hisown country without trouble or inconvenience to himself, no matter howdistant it may be. We must see that he comes to no harm while on hishomeward journey, but when he is once at home he will have to take theluck he was born with for better or worse like other people. It ispossible, however, that the stranger is one of the immortals who hascome down from heaven to visit us; but in this case the gods aredeparting from their usual practice, for hitherto they have madethemselves perfectly clear to us when we have been offering themhecatombs. They come and sit at our feasts just like one of our selves,and if any solitary wayfarer happens to stumble upon some one or otherof them, they affect no concealment, for we are as near of kin to thegods as the Cyclopes and the savage giants are.”62Then Ulysses said: “Pray, Alcinous, do not take any such notion intoyour head. I have nothing of the immortal about me, neither in body normind, and most resemble those among you who are the most afflicted.Indeed, were I to tell you all that heaven has seen fit to lay upon me,you would say that I was still worse off than they are. Nevertheless,let me sup in spite of sorrow, for an empty stomach is a veryimportunate thing, and thrusts itself on a man’s notice no matter howdire is his distress. I am in great trouble, yet it insists that Ishall eat and drink, bids me lay aside all memory of my sorrows anddwell only on the due replenishing of itself. As for yourselves, do asyou propose, and at break of day set about helping me to get home. Ishall be content to die if I may first once more behold my property, mybondsmen, and all the greatness of my house.”63Thus did he speak. Every one approved his saying, and agreed that heshould have his escort inasmuch as he had spoken reasonably. Then whenthey had made their drink offerings, and had drunk each as much as hewas minded they went home to bed every man in his own abode, leavingUlysses in the cloister with Arete and Alcinous while the servants weretaking the things away after supper. Arete was the first to speak, forshe recognised the shirt, cloak, and good clothes that Ulysses waswearing, as the work of herself and of her maids; so she said,“Stranger, before we go any further, there is a question I should liketo ask you. Who, and whence are you, and who gave you those clothes?Did you not say you had come here from beyond the sea?”And Ulysses answered, “It would be a long story Madam, were I to relatein full the tale of my misfortunes, for the hand of heaven has beenlaid heavy upon me; but as regards your question, there is an islandfar away in the sea which is called ‘the Ogygian.’ Here dwells thecunning and powerful goddess Calypso, daughter of Atlas. She lives byherself far from all neighbours human or divine. Fortune, however,brought me to her hearth all desolate and alone, for Jove struck myship with his thunderbolts, and broke it up in mid-ocean. My bravecomrades were drowned every man of them, but I stuck to the keel andwas carried hither and thither for the space of nine days, till at lastduring the darkness of the tenth night the gods brought me to theOgygian island where the great goddess Calypso lives. She took me inand treated me with the utmost kindness; indeed she wanted to make meimmortal that I might never grow old, but she could not persuade me tolet her do so.“I stayed with Calypso seven years straight on end, and watered thegood clothes she gave me with my tears during the whole time; but atlast when the eighth year came round she bade me depart of her own freewill, either because Jove had told her she must, or because she hadchanged her mind. She sent me from her island on a raft, which sheprovisioned with abundance of bread and wine. Moreover she gave me goodstout clothing, and sent me a wind that blew both warm and fair. Daysseven and ten did I sail over the sea, and on the eighteenth I caughtsight of the first outlines of the mountains upon your coast—and gladindeed was I to set eyes upon them. Nevertheless there was still muchtrouble in store for me, for at this point Neptune would let me go nofurther, and raised a great storm against me; the sea was so terriblyhigh that I could no longer keep to my raft, which went to pieces underthe fury of the gale, and I had to swim for it, till wind and currentbrought me to your shores.“There I tried to land, but could not, for it was a bad place and thewaves dashed me against the rocks, so I again took to the sea and swamon till I came to a river that seemed the most likely landing place,for there were no rocks and it was sheltered from the wind. Here, then,I got out of the water and gathered my senses together again. Night wascoming on, so I left the river, and went into a thicket, where Icovered myself all over with leaves, and presently heaven sent me offinto a very deep sleep. Sick and sorry as I was I slept among theleaves all night, and through the next day till afternoon, when I wokeas the sun was westering, and saw your daughter’s maid servants playingupon the beach, and your daughter among them looking like a goddess. Ibesought her aid, and she proved to be of an excellent disposition,much more so than could be expected from so young a person—for youngpeople are apt to be thoughtless. She gave me plenty of bread and wine,and when she had had me washed in the river she also gave me theclothes in which you see me. Now, therefore, though it has pained me todo so, I have told you the whole truth.”Then Alcinous said, “Stranger, it was very wrong of my daughter not tobring you on at once to my house along with the maids, seeing that shewas the first person whose aid you asked.”“Pray do not scold her,” replied Ulysses; “she is not to blame. She didtell me to follow along with the maids, but I was ashamed and afraid,for I thought you might perhaps be displeased if you saw me. Everyhuman being is sometimes a little suspicious and irritable.”“Stranger,” replied Alcinous, “I am not the kind of man to get angryabout nothing; it is always better to be reasonable; but by FatherJove, Minerva, and Apollo, now that I see what kind of person you are,and how much you think as I do, I wish you would stay here, marry mydaughter, and become my son-in-law. If you will stay I will give you ahouse and an estate, but no one (heaven forbid) shall keep you hereagainst your own wish, and that you may be sure of this I will attendtomorrow to the matter of your escort. You can sleep64 during the wholevoyage if you like, and the men shall sail you over smooth waterseither to your own home, or wherever you please, even though it be along way further off than Euboea, which those of my people who saw itwhen they took yellow-haired Rhadamanthus to see Tityus the son ofGaia, tell me is the furthest of any place—and yet they did the wholevoyage in a single day without distressing themselves, and came backagain afterwards. You will thus see how much my ships excel all others,and what magnificent oarsmen my sailors are.”Then was Ulysses glad and prayed aloud saying, “Father Jove, grant thatAlcinous may do all as he has said, for so he will win an imperishablename among mankind, and at the same time I shall return to my country.”Thus did they converse. Then Arete told her maids to set a bed in theroom that was in the gatehouse, and make it with good red rugs, and tospread coverlets on the top of them with woollen cloaks for Ulysses towear. The maids thereon went out with torches in their hands, and whenthey had made the bed they came up to Ulysses and said, “Rise, sirstranger, and come with us for your bed is ready,” and glad indeed washe to go to his rest.So Ulysses slept in a bed placed in a room over the echoing gateway;but Alcinous lay in the inner part of the house, with the queen hiswife by his side.BOOK VIIIBANQUET IN THE HOUSE OF ALCINOUS—THE GAMES.Now when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Alcinousand Ulysses both rose, and Alcinous led the way to the Phaeacian placeof assembly, which was near the ships. When they got there they satdown side by side on a seat of polished stone, while Minerva took theform of one of Alcinous’ servants, and went round the town in order tohelp Ulysses to get home. She went up to the citizens, man by man, andsaid, “Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, come to theassembly all of you and listen to the stranger who has just come off along voyage to the house of King Alcinous; he looks like an immortalgod.”With these words she made them all want to come, and they flocked tothe assembly till seats and standing room were alike crowded. Every onewas struck with the appearance of Ulysses, for Minerva had beautifiedhim about the head and shoulders, making him look taller and stouterthan he really was, that he might impress the Phaeacians favourably asbeing a very remarkable man, and might come off well in the many trialsof skill to which they would challenge him. Then, when they were gottogether, Alcinous spoke:“Hear me,” said he, “aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians,that I may speak even as I am minded. This stranger, whoever he may be,has found his way to my house from somewhere or other either East orWest. He wants an escort and wishes to have the matter settled. Let usthen get one ready for him, as we have done for others before him;indeed, no one who ever yet came to my house has been able to complainof me for not speeding on his way soon enough. Let us draw a ship intothe sea—one that has never yet made a voyage—and man her with two andfifty of our smartest young sailors. Then when you have made fast youroars each by his own seat, leave the ship and come to my house toprepare a feast.65 I will find you in everything. I am giving theseinstructions to the young men who will form the crew, for as regardsyou aldermen and town councillors, you will join me in entertaining ourguest in the cloisters. I can take no excuses, and we will haveDemodocus to sing to us; for there is no bard like him whatever he maychoose to sing about.”Alcinous then led the way, and the others followed after, while aservant went to fetch Demodocus. The fifty-two picked oarsmen went tothe sea shore as they had been told, and when they got there they drewthe ship into the water, got her mast and sails inside her, bound theoars to the thole-pins with twisted thongs of leather, all in duecourse, and spread the white sails aloft. They moored the vessel alittle way out from land, and then came on shore and went to the houseof King Alcinous. The out houses,66 yards, and all the precincts werefilled with crowds of men in great multitudes both old and young; andAlcinous killed them a dozen sheep, eight full grown pigs, and twooxen. These they skinned and dressed so as to provide a magnificentbanquet.A servant presently led in the famous bard Demodocus, whom the muse haddearly loved, but to whom she had given both good and evil, for thoughshe had endowed him with a divine gift of song, she had robbed him ofhis eyesight. Pontonous set a seat for him among the guests, leaning itup against a bearing-post. He hung the lyre for him on a peg over hishead, and showed him where he was to feel for it with his hands. Healso set a fair table with a basket of victuals by his side, and a cupof wine from which he might drink whenever he was so disposed.The company then laid their hands upon the good things that were beforethem, but as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, the museinspired Demodocus to sing the feats of heroes, and more especially amatter that was then in the mouths of all men, to wit, the quarrelbetween Ulysses and Achilles, and the fierce words that they heaped onone another as they sat together at a banquet. But Agamemnon was gladwhen he heard his chieftains quarrelling with one another, for Apollohad foretold him this at Pytho when he crossed the stone floor toconsult the oracle. Here was the beginning of the evil that by the willof Jove fell both upon Danaans and Trojans.Thus sang the bard, but Ulysses drew his purple mantle over his headand covered his face, for he was ashamed to let the Phaeacians see thathe was weeping. When the bard left off singing he wiped the tears fromhis eyes, uncovered his face, and, taking his cup, made adrink-offering to the gods; but when the Phaeacians pressed Demodocusto sing further, for they delighted in his lays, then Ulysses againdrew his mantle over his head and wept bitterly. No one noticed hisdistress except Alcinous, who was sitting near him, and heard the heavysighs that he was heaving. So he at once said, “Aldermen and towncouncillors of the Phaeacians, we have had enough now, both of thefeast, and of the minstrelsy that is its due accompaniment; let usproceed therefore to the athletic sports, so that our guest on hisreturn home may be able to tell his friends how much we surpass allother nations as boxers, wrestlers, jumpers, and runners.”With these words he led the way, and the others followed after. Aservant hung Demodocus’s lyre on its peg for him, led him out of thecloister, and set him on the same way as that along which all the chiefmen of the Phaeacians were going to see the sports; a crowd of severalthousands of people followed them, and there were many excellentcompetitors for all the prizes. Acroneos, Ocyalus, Elatreus, Nauteus,Prymneus, Anchialus, Eretmeus, Ponteus, Proreus, Thoon, Anabesineus,and Amphialus son of Polyneus son of Tecton. There was also Euryalusson of Naubolus, who was like Mars himself, and was the best lookingman among the Phaeacians except Laodamas. Three sons of Alcinous,Laodamas, Halios, and Clytoneus, competed also.The foot races came first. The course was set out for them from thestarting post, and they raised a dust upon the plain as they all flewforward at the same moment. Clytoneus came in first by a long way; heleft every one else behind him by the length of the furrow that acouple of mules can plough in a fallow field.67 They then turned to thepainful art of wrestling, and here Euryalus proved to be the best man.Amphialus excelled all the others in jumping, while at throwing thedisc there was no one who could approach Elatreus. Alcinous’s sonLaodamas was the best boxer, and he it was who presently said, whenthey had all been diverted with the games, “Let us ask the strangerwhether he excels in any of these sports; he seems very powerfullybuilt; his thighs, calves, hands, and neck are of prodigious strength,nor is he at all old, but he has suffered much lately, and there isnothing like the sea for making havoc with a man, no matter how stronghe is.”“You are quite right, Laodamas,” replied Euryalus, “go up to your guestand speak to him about it yourself.”When Laodamas heard this he made his way into the middle of the crowdand said to Ulysses, “I hope, Sir, that you will enter yourself forsome one or other of our competitions if you are skilled in any ofthem—and you must have gone in for many a one before now. There isnothing that does any one so much credit all his life long as theshowing himself a proper man with his hands and feet. Have a trytherefore at something, and banish all sorrow from your mind. Yourreturn home will not be long delayed, for the ship is already drawninto the water, and the crew is found.”Ulysses answered, “Laodamas, why do you taunt me in this way? my mindis set rather on cares than contests; I have been through infinitetrouble, and am come among you now as a suppliant, praying your kingand people to further me on my return home.”Then Euryalus reviled him outright and said, “I gather, then, that youare unskilled in any of the many sports that men generally delight in.I suppose you are one of those grasping traders that go about in shipsas captains or merchants, and who think of nothing but of their outwardfreights and homeward cargoes. There does not seem to be much of theathlete about you.”“For shame, Sir,” answered Ulysses, fiercely, “you are an insolentfellow—so true is it that the gods do not grace all men alike inspeech, person, and understanding. One man may be of weak presence, butheaven has adorned this with such a good conversation that he charmsevery one who sees him; his honeyed moderation carries his hearers withhim so that he is leader in all assemblies of his fellows, and whereverhe goes he is looked up to. Another may be as handsome as a god, buthis good looks are not crowned with discretion. This is your case. Nogod could make a finer looking fellow than you are, but you are a fool.Your ill-judged remarks have made me exceedingly angry, and you arequite mistaken, for I excel in a great many athletic exercises; indeed,so long as I had youth and strength, I was among the first athletes ofthe age. Now, however, I am worn out by labour and sorrow, for I havegone through much both on the field of battle and by the waves of theweary sea; still, in spite of all this I will compete, for your tauntshave stung me to the quick.”So he hurried up without even taking his cloak off, and seized a disc,larger, more massive and much heavier than those used by the Phaeacianswhen disc-throwing among themselves.68 Then, swinging it back, he threwit from his brawny hand, and it made a humming sound in the air as hedid so. The Phaeacians quailed beneath the rushing of its flight as itsped gracefully from his hand, and flew beyond any mark that had beenmade yet. Minerva, in the form of a man, came and marked the placewhere it had fallen. “A blind man, Sir,” said she, “could easily tellyour mark by groping for it—it is so far ahead of any other. You maymake your mind easy about this contest, for no Phaeacian can come nearto such a throw as yours.”Ulysses was glad when he found he had a friend among the lookers-on, sohe began to speak more pleasantly. “Young men,” said he, “come up tothat throw if you can, and I will throw another disc as heavy or evenheavier. If anyone wants to have a bout with me let him come on, for Iam exceedingly angry; I will box, wrestle, or run, I do not care whatit is, with any man of you all except Laodamas, but not with himbecause I am his guest, and one cannot compete with one’s own personalfriend. At least I do not think it a prudent or a sensible thing for aguest to challenge his host’s family at any game, especially when he isin a foreign country. He will cut the ground from under his own feet ifhe does; but I make no exception as regards any one else, for I want tohave the matter out and know which is the best man. I am a good hand atevery kind of athletic sport known among mankind. I am an excellentarcher. In battle I am always the first to bring a man down with myarrow, no matter how many more are taking aim at him alongside of me.Philoctetes was the only man who could shoot better than I could whenwe Achaeans were before Troy and in practice. I far excel every oneelse in the whole world, of those who still eat bread upon the face ofthe earth, but I should not like to shoot against the mighty dead, suchas Hercules, or Eurytus the Oechalian—men who could shoot against thegods themselves. This in fact was how Eurytus came prematurely by hisend, for Apollo was angry with him and killed him because he challengedhim as an archer. I can throw a dart farther than any one else canshoot an arrow. Running is the only point in respect of which I amafraid some of the Phaeacians might beat me, for I have been broughtdown very low at sea; my provisions ran short, and therefore I am stillweak.”They all held their peace except King Alcinous, who began, “Sir, wehave had much pleasure in hearing all that you have told us, from whichI understand that you are willing to show your prowess, as having beendispleased with some insolent remarks that have been made to you by oneof our athletes, and which could never have been uttered by any one whoknows how to talk with propriety. I hope you will apprehend my meaning,and will explain to any one of your chief men who may be dining withyourself and your family when you get home, that we have an hereditaryaptitude for accomplishments of all kinds. We are not particularlyremarkable for our boxing, nor yet as wrestlers, but we are singularlyfleet of foot and are excellent sailors. We are extremely fond of gooddinners, music, and dancing; we also like frequent changes of linen,warm baths, and good beds, so now, please, some of you who are the bestdancers set about dancing, that our guest on his return home may beable to tell his friends how much we surpass all other nations assailors, runners, dancers, and minstrels. Demodocus has left his lyreat my house, so run some one or other of you and fetch it for him.”On this a servant hurried off to bring the lyre from the king’s house,and the nine men who had been chosen as stewards stood forward. It wastheir business to manage everything connected with the sports, so theymade the ground smooth and marked a wide space for the dancers.Presently the servant came back with Demodocus’s lyre, and he took hisplace in the midst of them, whereon the best young dancers in the townbegan to foot and trip it so nimbly that Ulysses was delighted with themerry twinkling of their feet.Meanwhile the bard began to sing the loves of Mars and Venus, and howthey first began their intrigue in the house of Vulcan. Mars made Venusmany presents, and defiled King Vulcan’s marriage bed, so the sun, whosaw what they were about, told Vulcan. Vulcan was very angry when heheard such dreadful news, so he went to his smithy brooding mischief,got his great anvil into its place, and began to forge some chainswhich none could either unloose or break, so that they might stay therein that place.69 When he had finished his snare he went into hisbedroom and festooned the bed-posts all over with chains like cobwebs;he also let many hang down from the great beam of the ceiling. Not evena god could see them so fine and subtle were they. As soon as he hadspread the chains all over the bed, he made as though he were settingout for the fair state of Lemnos, which of all places in the world wasthe one he was most fond of. But Mars kept no blind look out, and assoon as he saw him start, hurried off to his house, burning with lovefor Venus.Now Venus was just come in from a visit to her father Jove, and wasabout sitting down when Mars came inside the house, and said as he tookher hand in his own, “Let us go to the couch of Vulcan: he is not athome, but is gone off to Lemnos among the Sintians, whose speech isbarbarous.”She was nothing loth, so they went to the couch to take their rest,whereon they were caught in the toils which cunning Vulcan had spreadfor them, and could neither get up nor stir hand or foot, but found toolate that they were in a trap. Then Vulcan came up to them, for he hadturned back before reaching Lemnos, when his scout the sun told himwhat was going on. He was in a furious passion, and stood in thevestibule making a dreadful noise as he shouted to all the gods.“Father Jove,” he cried, “and all you other blessed gods who live forever, come here and see the ridiculous and disgraceful sight that Iwill show you. Jove’s daughter Venus is always dishonouring me becauseI am lame. She is in love with Mars, who is handsome and clean built,whereas I am a cripple—but my parents are to blame for that, not I;they ought never to have begotten me. Come and see the pair togetherasleep on my bed. It makes me furious to look at them. They are veryfond of one another, but I do not think they will lie there longer thanthey can help, nor do I think that they will sleep much; there,however, they shall stay till her father has repaid me the sum I gavehim for his baggage of a daughter, who is fair but not honest.”On this the gods gathered to the house of Vulcan. Earth-encirclingNeptune came, and Mercury the bringer of luck, and King Apollo, but thegoddesses staid at home all of them for shame. Then the givers of allgood things stood in the doorway, and the blessed gods roared withinextinguishable laughter, as they saw how cunning Vulcan had been,whereon one would turn towards his neighbour saying:“Ill deeds do not prosper, and the weak confound the strong. See howlimping Vulcan, lame as he is, has caught Mars who is the fleetest godin heaven; and now Mars will be cast in heavy damages.”Thus did they converse, but King Apollo said to Mercury, “MessengerMercury, giver of good things, you would not care how strong the chainswere, would you, if you could sleep with Venus?”“King Apollo,” answered Mercury, “I only wish I might get the chance,though there were three times as many chains—and you might look on, allof you, gods and goddesses, but I would sleep with her if I could.”The immortal gods burst out laughing as they heard him, but Neptunetook it all seriously, and kept on imploring Vulcan to set Mars freeagain. “Let him go,” he cried, “and I will undertake, as you require,that he shall pay you all the damages that are held reasonable amongthe immortal gods.”“Do not,” replied Vulcan, “ask me to do this; a bad man’s bond is badsecurity; what remedy could I enforce against you if Mars should goaway and leave his debts behind him along with his chains?”“Vulcan,” said Neptune, “if Mars goes away without paying his damages,I will pay you myself.” So Vulcan answered, “In this case I cannot andmust not refuse you.”Thereon he loosed the bonds that bound them, and as soon as they werefree they scampered off, Mars to Thrace and laughter-loving Venus toCyprus and to Paphos, where is her grove and her altar fragrant withburnt offerings. Here the Graces bathed her, and anointed her with oilof ambrosia such as the immortal gods make use of, and they clothed herin raiment of the most enchanting beauty.Thus sang the bard, and both Ulysses and the seafaring Phaeacians werecharmed as they heard him.Then Alcinous told Laodamas and Halius to dance alone, for there was noone to compete with them. So they took a red ball which Polybus hadmade for them, and one of them bent himself backwards and threw it uptowards the clouds, while the other jumped from off the ground andcaught it with ease before it came down again. When they had donethrowing the ball straight up into the air they began to dance, and atthe same time kept on throwing it backwards and forwards to oneanother, while all the young men in the ring applauded and made a greatstamping with their feet. Then Ulysses said:“King Alcinous, you said your people were the nimblest dancers in theworld, and indeed they have proved themselves to be so. I wasastonished as I saw them.”The king was delighted at this, and exclaimed to the Phaeacians,“Aldermen and town councillors, our guest seems to be a person ofsingular judgement; let us give him such proof of our hospitality as hemay reasonably expect. There are twelve chief men among you, andcounting myself there are thirteen; contribute, each of you, a cleancloak, a shirt, and a talent of fine gold; let us give him all this ina lump down at once, so that when he gets his supper he may do so witha light heart. As for Euryalus he will have to make a formal apologyand a present too, for he has been rude.”Thus did he speak. The others all of them applauded his saying, andsent their servants to fetch the presents. Then Euryalus said, “KingAlcinous, I will give the stranger all the satisfaction you require. Heshall have my sword, which is of bronze, all but the hilt, which is ofsilver. I will also give him the scabbard of newly sawn ivory intowhich it fits. It will be worth a great deal to him.”As he spoke he placed the sword in the hands of Ulysses and said, “Goodluck to you, father stranger; if anything has been said amiss may thewinds blow it away with them, and may heaven grant you a safe return,for I understand you have been long away from home, and have gonethrough much hardship.”To which Ulysses answered, “Good luck to you too my friend, and may thegods grant you every happiness. I hope you will not miss the sword youhave given me along with your apology.”With these words he girded the sword about his shoulders and towardssundown the presents began to make their appearance, as the servants ofthe donors kept bringing them to the house of King Alcinous; here hissons received them, and placed them under their mother’s charge. ThenAlcinous led the way to the house and bade his guests take their seats.“Wife,” said he, turning to Queen Arete, “Go, fetch the best chest wehave, and put a clean cloak and shirt in it. Also, set a copper on thefire and heat some water; our guest will take a warm bath; see also tothe careful packing of the presents that the noble Phaeacians have madehim; he will thus better enjoy both his supper and the singing thatwill follow. I shall myself give him this golden goblet—which is ofexquisite workmanship—that he may be reminded of me for the rest of hislife whenever he makes a drink offering to Jove, or to any of thegods.”70Then Arete told her maids to set a large tripod upon the fire as fastas they could, whereon they set a tripod full of bath water on to aclear fire; they threw on sticks to make it blaze, and the water becamehot as the flame played about the belly of the tripod.71 MeanwhileArete brought a magnificent chest from her own room, and inside it shepacked all the beautiful presents of gold and raiment which thePhaeacians had brought. Lastly she added a cloak and a good shirt fromAlcinous, and said to Ulysses:“See to the lid yourself, and have the whole bound round at once, forfear any one should rob you by the way when you are asleep in yourship.” 72When Ulysses heard this he put the lid on the chest and made it fastwith a bond that Circe had taught him. He had done so before an upperservant told him to come to the bath and wash himself. He was very gladof a warm bath, for he had had no one to wait upon him ever since heleft the house of Calypso, who as long as he remained with her hadtaken as good care of him as though he had been a god. When theservants had done washing and anointing him with oil, and had given hima clean cloak and shirt, he left the bath room and joined the guestswho were sitting over their wine. Lovely Nausicaa stood by one of thebearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister, and admired him asshe saw him pass. “Farewell stranger,” said she, “do not forget me whenyou are safe at home again, for it is to me first that you owe a ransomfor having saved your life.”And Ulysses said, “Nausicaa, daughter of great Alcinous, may Jove themighty husband of Juno, grant that I may reach my home; so shall Ibless you as my guardian angel all my days, for it was you who savedme.”When he had said this, he seated himself beside Alcinous. Supper wasthen served, and the wine was mixed for drinking. A servant led in thefavourite bard Demodocus, and set him in the midst of the company, nearone of the bearing-posts supporting the cloister, that he might leanagainst it. Then Ulysses cut off a piece of roast pork with plenty offat (for there was abundance left on the joint) and said to a servant,“Take this piece of pork over to Demodocus and tell him to eat it; forall the pain his lays may cause me I will salute him none the less;bards are honoured and respected throughout the world, for the museteaches them their songs and loves them.”The servant carried the pork in his fingers over to Demodocus, who tookit and was very much pleased. They then laid their hands on the goodthings that were before them, and as soon as they had had to eat anddrink, Ulysses said to Demodocus, “Demodocus, there is no one in theworld whom I admire more than I do you. You must have studied under theMuse, Jove’s daughter, and under Apollo, so accurately do you sing thereturn of the Achaeans with all their sufferings and adventures. If youwere not there yourself, you must have heard it all from some one whowas. Now, however, change your song and tell us of the wooden horsewhich Epeus made with the assistance of Minerva, and which Ulysses gotby stratagem into the fort of Troy after freighting it with the men whoafterwards sacked the city. If you will sing this tale aright I willtell all the world how magnificently heaven has endowed you.”The bard inspired of heaven took up the story at the point where someof the Argives set fire to their tents and sailed away while others,hidden within the horse,73 were waiting with Ulysses in the Trojanplace of assembly. For the Trojans themselves had drawn the horse intotheir fortress, and it stood there while they sat in council round it,and were in three minds as to what they should do. Some were forbreaking it up then and there; others would have it dragged to the topof the rock on which the fortress stood, and then thrown down theprecipice; while yet others were for letting it remain as an offeringand propitiation for the gods. And this was how they settled it in theend, for the city was doomed when it took in that horse, within whichwere all the bravest of the Argives waiting to bring death anddestruction on the Trojans. Anon he sang how the sons of the Achaeansissued from the horse, and sacked the town, breaking out from theirambuscade. He sang how they overran the city hither and thither andravaged it, and how Ulysses went raging like Mars along with Menelausto the house of Deiphobus. It was there that the fight raged mostfuriously, nevertheless by Minerva’s help he was victorious.All this he told, but Ulysses was overcome as he heard him, and hischeeks were wet with tears. He wept as a woman weeps when she throwsherself on the body of her husband who has fallen before his own cityand people, fighting bravely in defence of his home and children. Shescreams aloud and flings her arms about him as he lies gasping forbreath and dying, but her enemies beat her from behind about the backand shoulders, and carry her off into slavery, to a life of labour andsorrow, and the beauty fades from her cheeks—even so piteously didUlysses weep, but none of those present perceived his tears exceptAlcinous, who was sitting near him, and could hear the sobs and sighsthat he was heaving. The king, therefore, at once rose and said:“Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, let Demodocus ceasehis song, for there are those present who do not seem to like it. Fromthe moment that we had done supper and Demodocus began to sing, ourguest has been all the time groaning and lamenting. He is evidently ingreat trouble, so let the bard leave off, that we may all enjoyourselves, hosts and guest alike. This will be much more as it shouldbe, for all these festivities, with the escort and the presents that weare making with so much good will are wholly in his honour, and any onewith even a moderate amount of right feeling knows that he ought totreat a guest and a suppliant as though he were his own brother.“Therefore, Sir, do you on your part affect no more concealment norreserve in the matter about which I shall ask you; it will be morepolite in you to give me a plain answer; tell me the name by which yourfather and mother over yonder used to call you, and by which you wereknown among your neighbours and fellow-citizens. There is no one,neither rich nor poor, who is absolutely without any name whatever, forpeople’s fathers and mothers give them names as soon as they are born.Tell me also your country, nation, and city, that our ships may shapetheir purpose accordingly and take you there. For the Phaeacians haveno pilots; their vessels have no rudders as those of other nationshave, but the ships themselves understand what it is that we arethinking about and want; they know all the cities and countries in thewhole world, and can traverse the sea just as well even when it iscovered with mist and cloud, so that there is no danger of beingwrecked or coming to any harm. Still I do remember hearing my fathersay that Neptune was angry with us for being too easy-going in thematter of giving people escorts. He said that one of these days heshould wreck a ship of ours as it was returning from having escortedsome one,74 and bury our city under a high mountain. This is what myfather used to say, but whether the god will carry out his threat or nois a matter which he will decide for himself.“And now, tell me and tell me true. Where have you been wandering, andin what countries have you travelled? Tell us of the peoplesthemselves, and of their cities—who were hostile, savage anduncivilised, and who, on the other hand, hospitable and humane. Tell usalso why you are made so unhappy on hearing about the return of theArgive Danaans from Troy. The gods arranged all this, and sent themtheir misfortunes in order that future generations might have somethingto sing about. Did you lose some brave kinsman of your wife’s when youwere before Troy? a son-in-law or father-in-law—which are the nearestrelations a man has outside his own flesh and blood? or was it somebrave and kindly-natured comrade—for a good friend is as dear to a manas his own brother?”BOOK IXULYSSES DECLARES HIMSELF AND BEGINS HIS STORY—-THE CICONS, LOTOPHAGI,AND CYCLOPES.And Ulysses answered, “King Alcinous, it is a good thing to hear a bardwith such a divine voice as this man has. There is nothing better ormore delightful than when a whole people make merry together, with theguests sitting orderly to listen, while the table is loaded with breadand meats, and the cup-bearer draws wine and fills his cup for everyman. This is indeed as fair a sight as a man can see. Now, however,since you are inclined to ask the story of my sorrows, and rekindle myown sad memories in respect of them, I do not know how to begin, noryet how to continue and conclude my tale, for the hand of heaven hasbeen laid heavily upon me.“Firstly, then, I will tell you my name that you too may know it, andone day, if I outlive this time of sorrow, may become my guests thoughI live so far away from all of you. I am Ulysses son of Laertes,renowned among mankind for all manner of subtlety, so that my fameascends to heaven. I live in Ithaca, where there is a high mountaincalled Neritum, covered with forests; and not far from it there is agroup of islands very near to one another—Dulichium, Same, and thewooded island of Zacynthus. It lies squat on the horizon, all highestup in the sea towards the sunset, while the others lie away from ittowards dawn.75 It is a rugged island, but it breeds brave men, and myeyes know none that they better love to look upon. The goddess Calypsokept me with her in her cave, and wanted me to marry her, as did alsothe cunning Aeaean goddess Circe; but they could neither of thempersuade me, for there is nothing dearer to a man than his own countryand his parents, and however splendid a home he may have in a foreigncountry, if it be far from father or mother, he does not care about it.Now, however, I will tell you of the many hazardous adventures which byJove’s will I met with on my return from Troy.“When I had set sail thence the wind took me first to Ismarus, which isthe city of the Cicons. There I sacked the town and put the people tothe sword. We took their wives and also much booty, which we dividedequitably amongst us, so that none might have reason to complain. Ithen said that we had better make off at once, but my men veryfoolishly would not obey me, so they staid there drinking much wine andkilling great numbers of sheep and oxen on the sea shore. Meanwhile theCicons cried out for help to other Cicons who lived inland. These weremore in number, and stronger, and they were more skilled in the art ofwar, for they could fight, either from chariots or on foot as theoccasion served; in the morning, therefore, they came as thick asleaves and bloom in summer, and the hand of heaven was against us, sothat we were hard pressed. They set the battle in array near the ships,and the hosts aimed their bronze-shod spears at one another.76 So longas the day waxed and it was still morning, we held our own againstthem, though they were more in number than we; but as the sun wentdown, towards the time when men loose their oxen, the Cicons got thebetter of us, and we lost half a dozen men from every ship we had; sowe got away with those that were left.“Thence we sailed onward with sorrow in our hearts, but glad to haveescaped death though we had lost our comrades, nor did we leave till wehad thrice invoked each one of the poor fellows who had perished by thehands of the Cicons. Then Jove raised the North wind against us till itblew a hurricane, so that land and sky were hidden in thick clouds, andnight sprang forth out of the heavens. We let the ships run before thegale, but the force of the wind tore our sails to tatters, so we tookthem down for fear of shipwreck, and rowed our hardest towards theland. There we lay two days and two nights suffering much alike fromtoil and distress of mind, but on the morning of the third day we againraised our masts, set sail, and took our places, letting the wind andsteersmen direct our ship. I should have got home at that time unharmedhad not the North wind and the currents been against me as I wasdoubling Cape Malea, and set me off my course hard by the island ofCythera.“I was driven thence by foul winds for a space of nine days upon thesea, but on the tenth day we reached the land of the Lotus-eaters, wholive on a food that comes from a kind of flower. Here we landed to takein fresh water, and our crews got their mid-day meal on the shore nearthe ships. When they had eaten and drunk I sent two of my company tosee what manner of men the people of the place might be, and they had athird man under them. They started at once, and went about among theLotus-eaters, who did them no hurt, but gave them to eat of the lotus,which was so delicious that those who ate of it left off caring abouthome, and did not even want to go back and say what had happened tothem, but were for staying and munching lotus77 with the Lotus-eaterswithout thinking further of their return; nevertheless, though theywept bitterly I forced them back to the ships and made them fast underthe benches. Then I told the rest to go on board at once, lest any ofthem should taste of the lotus and leave off wanting to get home, sothey took their places and smote the grey sea with their oars.“We sailed hence, always in much distress, till we came to the land ofthe lawless and inhuman Cyclopes. Now the Cyclopes neither plant norplough, but trust in providence, and live on such wheat, barley, andgrapes as grow wild without any kind of tillage, and their wild grapesyield them wine as the sun and the rain may grow them. They have nolaws nor assemblies of the people, but live in caves on the tops ofhigh mountains; each is lord and master in his family, and they take noaccount of their neighbours.“Now off their harbour there lies a wooded and fertile island not quiteclose to the land of the Cyclopes, but still not far. It is over-runwith wild goats, that breed there in great numbers and are neverdisturbed by foot of man; for sportsmen—who as a rule will suffer somuch hardship in forest or among mountain precipices—do not go there,nor yet again is it ever ploughed or fed down, but it lies a wildernessuntilled and unsown from year to year, and has no living thing upon itbut only goats. For the Cyclopes have no ships, nor yet shipwrights whocould make ships for them; they cannot therefore go from city to city,or sail over the sea to one another’s country as people who have shipscan do; if they had had these they would have colonised the island,78for it is a very good one, and would yield everything in due season.There are meadows that in some places come right down to the sea shore,well watered and full of luscious grass; grapes would do thereexcellently; there is level land for ploughing, and it would alwaysyield heavily at harvest time, for the soil is deep. There is a goodharbour where no cables are wanted, nor yet anchors, nor need a ship bemoored, but all one has to do is to beach one’s vessel and stay theretill the wind becomes fair for putting out to sea again. At the head ofthe harbour there is a spring of clear water coming out of a cave, andthere are poplars growing all round it.“Here we entered, but so dark was the night that some god must havebrought us in, for there was nothing whatever to be seen. A thick misthung all round our ships;79 the moon was hidden behind a mass of cloudsso that no one could have seen the island if he had looked for it, norwere there any breakers to tell us we were close in shore before wefound ourselves upon the land itself; when, however, we had beached theships, we took down the sails, went ashore and camped upon the beachtill daybreak.“When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, we admired theisland and wandered all over it, while the nymphs Jove’s daughtersroused the wild goats that we might get some meat for our dinner. Onthis we fetched our spears and bows and arrows from the ships, anddividing ourselves into three bands began to shoot the goats. Heavensent us excellent sport; I had twelve ships with me, and each ship gotnine goats, while my own ship had ten; thus through the livelong day tothe going down of the sun we ate and drank our fill, and we had plentyof wine left, for each one of us had taken many jars full when wesacked the city of the Cicons, and this had not yet run out. While wewere feasting we kept turning our eyes towards the land of theCyclopes, which was hard by, and saw the smoke of their stubble fires.We could almost fancy we heard their voices and the bleating of theirsheep and goats, but when the sun went down and it came on dark, wecamped down upon the beach, and next morning I called a council.“‘Stay here, my brave fellows,’ said I, ‘all the rest of you, while Igo with my ship and exploit these people myself: I want to see if theyare uncivilised savages, or a hospitable and humane race.’“I went on board, bidding my men to do so also and loose the hawsers;so they took their places and smote the grey sea with their oars. Whenwe got to the land, which was not far, there, on the face of a cliffnear the sea, we saw a great cave overhung with laurels. It was astation for a great many sheep and goats, and outside there was a largeyard, with a high wall round it made of stones built into the groundand of trees both pine and oak. This was the abode of a huge monsterwho was then away from home shepherding his flocks. He would havenothing to do with other people, but led the life of an outlaw. He wasa horrid creature, not like a human being at all, but resembling rathersome crag that stands out boldly against the sky on the top of a highmountain.“I told my men to draw the ship ashore, and stay where they were, allbut the twelve best among them, who were to go along with myself. Ialso took a goatskin of sweet black wine which had been given me byMaron, son of Euanthes, who was priest of Apollo the patron god ofIsmarus, and lived within the wooded precincts of the temple. When wewere sacking the city we respected him, and spared his life, as alsohis wife and child; so he made me some presents of great value—seventalents of fine gold, and a bowl of silver, with twelve jars of sweetwine, unblended, and of the most exquisite flavour. Not a man nor maidin the house knew about it, but only himself, his wife, and onehousekeeper: when he drank it he mixed twenty parts of water to one ofwine, and yet the fragrance from the mixing-bowl was so exquisite thatit was impossible to refrain from drinking. I filled a large skin withthis wine, and took a wallet full of provisions with me, for my mindmisgave me that I might have to deal with some savage who would be ofgreat strength, and would respect neither right nor law.“We soon reached his cave, but he was out shepherding, so we wentinside and took stock of all that we could see. His cheese-racks wereloaded with cheeses, and he had more lambs and kids than his pens couldhold. They were kept in separate flocks; first there were the hoggets,then the oldest of the younger lambs and lastly the very young ones80all kept apart from one another; as for his dairy, all the vessels,bowls, and milk pails into which he milked, were swimming with whey.When they saw all this, my men begged me to let them first steal somecheeses, and make off with them to the ship; they would then return,drive down the lambs and kids, put them on board and sail away withthem. It would have been indeed better if we had done so but I wouldnot listen to them, for I wanted to see the owner himself, in the hopethat he might give me a present. When, however, we saw him my poor menfound him ill to deal with.“We lit a fire, offered some of the cheeses in sacrifice, ate others ofthem, and then sat waiting till the Cyclops should come in with hissheep. When he came, he brought in with him a huge load of dry firewoodto light the fire for his supper, and this he flung with such a noiseon to the floor of his cave that we hid ourselves for fear at the farend of the cavern. Meanwhile he drove all the ewes inside, as well asthe she-goats that he was going to milk, leaving the males, both ramsand he-goats, outside in the yards. Then he rolled a huge stone to themouth of the cave—so huge that two and twenty strong four-wheeledwaggons would not be enough to draw it from its place against thedoorway. When he had so done he sat down and milked his ewes and goats,all in due course, and then let each of them have her own young. Hecurdled half the milk and set it aside in wicker strainers, but theother half he poured into bowls that he might drink it for his supper.When he had got through with all his work, he lit the fire, and thencaught sight of us, whereon he said:“‘Strangers, who are you? Where do sail from? Are you traders, or doyou sail the sea as rovers, with your hands against every man, andevery man’s hand against you?’“We were frightened out of our senses by his loud voice and monstrousform, but I managed to say, ‘We are Achaeans on our way home from Troy,but by the will of Jove, and stress of weather, we have been driven farout of our course. We are the people of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, whohas won infinite renown throughout the whole world, by sacking so greata city and killing so many people. We therefore humbly pray you to showus some hospitality, and otherwise make us such presents as visitorsmay reasonably expect. May your excellency fear the wrath of heaven,for we are your suppliants, and Jove takes all respectable travellersunder his protection, for he is the avenger of all suppliants andforeigners in distress.’“To this he gave me but a pitiless answer, ‘Stranger,’ said he, ‘youare a fool, or else you know nothing of this country. Talk to me,indeed, about fearing the gods or shunning their anger? We Cyclopes donot care about Jove or any of your blessed gods, for we are ever somuch stronger than they. I shall not spare either yourself or yourcompanions out of any regard for Jove, unless I am in the humour fordoing so. And now tell me where you made your ship fast when you cameon shore. Was it round the point, or is she lying straight off theland?’“He said this to draw me out, but I was too cunning to be caught inthat way, so I answered with a lie; ‘Neptune,’ said I, ‘sent my ship onto the rocks at the far end of your country, and wrecked it. We weredriven on to them from the open sea, but I and those who are with meescaped the jaws of death.’“The cruel wretch vouchsafed me not one word of answer, but with asudden clutch he gripped up two of my men at once and dashed them downupon the ground as though they had been puppies. Their brains were shedupon the ground, and the earth was wet with their blood. Then he torethem limb from limb and supped upon them. He gobbled them up like alion in the wilderness, flesh, bones, marrow, and entrails, withoutleaving anything uneaten. As for us, we wept and lifted up our hands toheaven on seeing such a horrid sight, for we did not know what else todo; but when the Cyclops had filled his huge paunch, and had washeddown his meal of human flesh with a drink of neat milk, he stretchedhimself full length upon the ground among his sheep, and went to sleep.I was at first inclined to seize my sword, draw it, and drive it intohis vitals, but I reflected that if I did we should all certainly belost, for we should never be able to shift the stone which the monsterhad put in front of the door. So we stayed sobbing and sighing where wewere till morning came.“When the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, he again lithis fire, milked his goats and ewes, all quite rightly, and then leteach have her own young one; as soon as he had got through with all hiswork, he clutched up two more of my men, and began eating them for hismorning’s meal. Presently, with the utmost ease, he rolled the stoneaway from the door and drove out his sheep, but he at once put it backagain—as easily as though he were merely clapping the lid on to aquiver full of arrows. As soon as he had done so he shouted, and cried‘Shoo, shoo,’ after his sheep to drive them on to the mountain; so Iwas left to scheme some way of taking my revenge and covering myselfwith glory.“In the end I deemed it would be the best plan to do as follows: TheCyclops had a great club which was lying near one of the sheep pens; itwas of green olive wood, and he had cut it intending to use it for astaff as soon as it should be dry. It was so huge that we could onlycompare it to the mast of a twenty-oared merchant vessel of largeburden, and able to venture out into open sea. I went up to this cluband cut off about six feet of it; I then gave this piece to the men andtold them to fine it evenly off at one end, which they proceeded to do,and lastly I brought it to a point myself, charring the end in the fireto make it harder. When I had done this I hid it under dung, which waslying about all over the cave, and told the men to cast lots which ofthem should venture along with myself to lift it and bore it into themonster’s eye while he was asleep. The lot fell upon the very four whomI should have chosen, and I myself made five. In the evening the wretchcame back from shepherding, and drove his flocks into the cave—thistime driving them all inside, and not leaving any in the yards; Isuppose some fancy must have taken him, or a god must have prompted himto do so. As soon as he had put the stone back to its place against thedoor, he sat down, milked his ewes and his goats all quite rightly, andthen let each have her own young one; when he had got through with allthis work, he gripped up two more of my men, and made his supper offthem. So I went up to him with an ivy-wood bowl of black wine in myhands:“‘Look here, Cyclops,’ said I, you have been eating a great deal ofman’s flesh, so take this and drink some wine, that you may see whatkind of liquor we had on board my ship. I was bringing it to you as adrink-offering, in the hope that you would take compassion upon me andfurther me on my way home, whereas all you do is to go on ramping andraving most intolerably. You ought to be ashamed of yourself; how canyou expect people to come see you any more if you treat them in thisway?’“He then took the cup and drank. He was so delighted with the taste ofthe wine that he begged me for another bowl full. ‘Be so kind,’ hesaid, ‘as to give me some more, and tell me your name at once. I wantto make you a present that you will be glad to have. We have wine evenin this country, for our soil grows grapes and the sun ripens them, butthis drinks like Nectar and Ambrosia all in one.’“I then gave him some more; three times did I fill the bowl for him,and three times did he drain it without thought or heed; then, when Isaw that the wine had got into his head, I said to him as plausibly asI could: ‘Cyclops, you ask my name and I will tell it you; give me,therefore, the present you promised me; my name is Noman; this is whatmy father and mother and my friends have always called me.’“But the cruel wretch said, ‘Then I will eat all Noman’s comradesbefore Noman himself, and will keep Noman for the last. This is thepresent that I will make him.’“As he spoke he reeled, and fell sprawling face upwards on the ground.His great neck hung heavily backwards and a deep sleep took hold uponhim. Presently he turned sick, and threw up both wine and the gobbetsof human flesh on which he had been gorging, for he was very drunk.Then I thrust the beam of wood far into the embers to heat it, andencouraged my men lest any of them should turn faint-hearted. When thewood, green though it was, was about to blaze, I drew it out of thefire glowing with heat, and my men gathered round me, for heaven hadfilled their hearts with courage. We drove the sharp end of the beaminto the monster’s eye, and bearing upon it with all my weight I keptturning it round and round as though I were boring a hole in a ship’splank with an auger, which two men with a wheel and strap can keep onturning as long as they choose. Even thus did we bore the red hot beaminto his eye, till the boiling blood bubbled all over it as we workedit round and round, so that the steam from the burning eyeball scaldedhis eyelids and eyebrows, and the roots of the eye sputtered in thefire. As a blacksmith plunges an axe or hatchet into cold water totemper it—for it is this that gives strength to the iron—and it makes agreat hiss as he does so, even thus did the Cyclops’ eye hiss round thebeam of olive wood, and his hideous yells made the cave ring again. Weran away in a fright, but he plucked the beam all besmirched with gorefrom his eye, and hurled it from him in a frenzy of rage and pain,shouting as he did so to the other Cyclopes who lived on the bleakheadlands near him; so they gathered from all quarters round his cavewhen they heard him crying, and asked what was the matter with him.“‘What ails you, Polyphemus,’ said they, ‘that you make such a noise,breaking the stillness of the night, and preventing us from being ableto sleep? Surely no man is carrying off your sheep? Surely no man istrying to kill you either by fraud or by force?’“But Polyphemus shouted to them from inside the cave, ‘Noman is killingme by fraud; no man is killing me by force.’“‘Then,’ said they, ‘if no man is attacking you, you must be ill; whenJove makes people ill, there is no help for it, and you had better prayto your father Neptune.’“Then they went away, and I laughed inwardly at the success of myclever stratagem, but the Cyclops, groaning and in an agony of pain,felt about with his hands till he found the stone and took it from thedoor; then he sat in the doorway and stretched his hands in front of itto catch anyone going out with the sheep, for he thought I might befoolish enough to attempt this.“As for myself I kept on puzzling to think how I could best save my ownlife and those of my companions; I schemed and schemed, as one whoknows that his life depends upon it, for the danger was very great. Inthe end I deemed that this plan would be the best; the male sheep werewell grown, and carried a heavy black fleece, so I bound themnoiselessly in threes together, with some of the withies on which thewicked monster used to sleep. There was to be a man under the middlesheep, and the two on either side were to cover him, so that there werethree sheep to each man. As for myself there was a ram finer than anyof the others, so I caught hold of him by the back, esconced myself inthe thick wool under his belly, and hung on patiently to his fleece,face upwards, keeping a firm hold on it all the time.“Thus, then, did we wait in great fear of mind till morning came, butwhen the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, the male sheephurried out to feed, while the ewes remained bleating about the penswaiting to be milked, for their udders were full to bursting; but theirmaster in spite of all his pain felt the backs of all the sheep as theystood upright, without being sharp enough to find out that the men wereunderneath their bellies. As the ram was going out, last of all, heavywith its fleece and with the weight of my crafty self, Polyphemus laidhold of it and said:“‘My good ram, what is it that makes you the last to leave my cave thismorning? You are not wont to let the ewes go before you, but lead themob with a run whether to flowery mead or bubbling fountain, and arethe first to come home again at night; but now you lag last of all. Isit because you know your master has lost his eye, and are sorry becausethat wicked Noman and his horrid crew has got him down in his drink andblinded him? But I will have his life yet. If you could understand andtalk, you would tell me where the wretch is hiding, and I would dashhis brains upon the ground till they flew all over the cave. I shouldthus have some satisfaction for the harm this no-good Noman has doneme.’“As he spoke he drove the ram outside, but when we were a little wayout from the cave and yards, I first got from under the ram’s belly,and then freed my comrades; as for the sheep, which were very fat, byconstantly heading them in the right direction we managed to drive themdown to the ship. The crew rejoiced greatly at seeing those of us whohad escaped death, but wept for the others whom the Cyclops had killed.However, I made signs to them by nodding and frowning that they were tohush their crying, and told them to get all the sheep on board at onceand put out to sea; so they went aboard, took their places, and smotethe grey sea with their oars. Then, when I had got as far out as myvoice would reach, I began to jeer at the Cyclops.“‘Cyclops,’ said I, ‘you should have taken better measure of your manbefore eating up his comrades in your cave. You wretch, eat up yourvisitors in your own house? You might have known that your sin wouldfind you out, and now Jove and the other gods have punished you.’“He got more and more furious as he heard me, so he tore the top fromoff a high mountain, and flung it just in front of my ship so that itwas within a little of hitting the end of the rudder.81 The sea quakedas the rock fell into it, and the wash of the wave it raised carried usback towards the mainland, and forced us towards the shore. But Isnatched up a long pole and kept the ship off, making signs to my menby nodding my head, that they must row for their lives, whereon theylaid out with a will. When we had got twice as far as we were before, Iwas for jeering at the Cyclops again, but the men begged and prayed ofme to hold my tongue.“‘Do not,’ they exclaimed, ‘be mad enough to provoke this savagecreature further; he has thrown one rock at us already which drove usback again to the mainland, and we made sure it had been the death ofus; if he had then heard any further sound of voices he would havepounded our heads and our ship’s timbers into a jelly with the ruggedrocks he would have heaved at us, for he can throw them a long way.’“But I would not listen to them, and shouted out to him in my rage,‘Cyclops, if any one asks you who it was that put your eye out andspoiled your beauty, say it was the valiant warrior Ulysses, son ofLaertes, who lives in Ithaca.’“On this he groaned, and cried out, ‘Alas, alas, then the old prophecyabout me is coming true. There was a prophet here, at one time, a manboth brave and of great stature, Telemus son of Eurymus, who was anexcellent seer, and did all the prophesying for the Cyclopes till hegrew old; he told me that all this would happen to me some day, andsaid I should lose my sight by the hand of Ulysses. I have been allalong expecting some one of imposing presence and superhuman strength,whereas he turns out to be a little insignificant weakling, who hasmanaged to blind my eye by taking advantage of me in my drink; comehere, then, Ulysses, that I may make you presents to show myhospitality, and urge Neptune to help you forward on your journey—forNeptune and I are father and son. He, if he so will, shall heal me,which no one else neither god nor man can do.’“Then I said, ‘I wish I could be as sure of killing you outright andsending you down to the house of Hades, as I am that it will take morethan Neptune to cure that eye of yours.’“On this he lifted up his hands to the firmament of heaven and prayed,saying, ‘Hear me, great Neptune; if I am indeed your own true begottenson, grant that Ulysses may never reach his home alive; or if he mustget back to his friends at last, let him do so late and in sore plightafter losing all his men [let him reach his home in another man’s shipand find trouble in his house.’82“Thus did he pray, and Neptune heard his prayer. Then he picked up arock much larger than the first, swung it aloft and hurled it withprodigious force. It fell just short of the ship, but was within alittle of hitting the end of the rudder. The sea quaked as the rockfell into it, and the wash of the wave it raised drove us onwards onour way towards the shore of the island.“When at last we got to the island where we had left the rest of ourships, we found our comrades lamenting us, and anxiously awaiting ourreturn. We ran our vessel upon the sands and got out of her on to thesea shore; we also landed the Cyclops’ sheep, and divided themequitably amongst us so that none might have reason to complain. As forthe ram, my companions agreed that I should have it as an extra share;so I sacrificed it on the sea shore, and burned its thigh bones toJove, who is the lord of all. But he heeded not my sacrifice, and onlythought how he might destroy both my ships and my comrades.“Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we feastedour fill on meat and drink, but when the sun went down and it came ondark, we camped upon the beach. When the child of morning rosy-fingeredDawn appeared, I bade my men on board and loose the hawsers. Then theytook their places and smote the grey sea with their oars; so we sailedon with sorrow in our hearts, but glad to have escaped death though wehad lost our comrades.BOOK XAEOLUS, THE LAESTRYGONES, CIRCE.“Thence we went on to the Aeolian island where lives Aeolus son ofHippotas, dear to the immortal gods. It is an island that floats (as itwere) upon the sea,83 iron bound with a wall that girds it. Now, Aeolushas six daughters and six lusty sons, so he made the sons marry thedaughters, and they all live with their dear father and mother,feasting and enjoying every conceivable kind of luxury. All day longthe atmosphere of the house is loaded with the savour of roasting meatstill it groans again, yard and all; but by night they sleep on theirwell made bedsteads, each with his own wife between the blankets. Thesewere the people among whom we had now come.“Aeolus entertained me for a whole month asking me questions all thetime about Troy, the Argive fleet, and the return of the Achaeans. Itold him exactly how everything had happened, and when I said I mustgo, and asked him to further me on my way, he made no sort ofdifficulty, but set about doing so at once. Moreover, he flayed me aprime ox-hide to hold the ways of the roaring winds, which he shut upin the hide as in a sack—for Jove had made him captain over the winds,and he could stir or still each one of them according to his ownpleasure. He put the sack in the ship and bound the mouth so tightlywith a silver thread that not even a breath of a side-wind could blowfrom any quarter. The West wind which was fair for us did he alone letblow as it chose; but it all came to nothing, for we were lost throughour own folly.“Nine days and nine nights did we sail, and on the tenth day our nativeland showed on the horizon. We got so close in that we could see thestubble fires burning, and I, being then dead beat, fell into a lightsleep, for I had never let the rudder out of my own hands, that wemight get home the faster. On this the men fell to talking amongthemselves, and said I was bringing back gold and silver in the sackthat Aeolus had given me. ‘Bless my heart,’ would one turn to hisneighbour, saying, ‘how this man gets honoured and makes friends towhatever city or country he may go. See what fine prizes he is takinghome from Troy, while we, who have travelled just as far as he has,come back with hands as empty as we set out with—and now Aeolus hasgiven him ever so much more. Quick—let us see what it all is, and howmuch gold and silver there is in the sack he gave him.’“Thus they talked and evil counsels prevailed. They loosed the sack,whereupon the wind flew howling forth and raised a storm that carriedus weeping out to sea and away from our own country. Then I awoke, andknew not whether to throw myself into the sea or to live on and makethe best of it; but I bore it, covered myself up, and lay down in theship, while the men lamented bitterly as the fierce winds bore ourfleet back to the Aeolian island.“When we reached it we went ashore to take in water, and dined hard bythe ships. Immediately after dinner I took a herald and one of my menand went straight to the house of Aeolus, where I found him feastingwith his wife and family; so we sat down as suppliants on thethreshold. They were astounded when they saw us and said, ‘Ulysses,what brings you here? What god has been ill-treating you? We took greatpains to further you on your way home to Ithaca, or wherever it wasthat you wanted to go to.’“Thus did they speak, but I answered sorrowfully, ‘My men have undoneme; they, and cruel sleep, have ruined me. My friends, mend me thismischief, for you can if you will.’“I spoke as movingly as I could, but they said nothing, till theirfather answered, ‘Vilest of mankind, get you gone at once out of theisland; him whom heaven hates will I in no wise help. Be off, for youcome here as one abhorred of heaven.’ And with these words he sent mesorrowing from his door.“Thence we sailed sadly on till the men were worn out with long andfruitless rowing, for there was no longer any wind to help them. Sixdays, night and day did we toil, and on the seventh day we reached therocky stronghold of Lamus—Telepylus, the city of the Laestrygonians,where the shepherd who is driving in his sheep and goats [to be milked]salutes him who is driving out his flock [to feed] and this lastanswers the salute. In that country a man who could do without sleepmight earn double wages, one as a herdsman of cattle, and another as ashepherd, for they work much the same by night as they do by day.84“When we reached the harbour we found it land-locked under steepcliffs, with a narrow entrance between two headlands. My captains tookall their ships inside, and made them fast close to one another, forthere was never so much as a breath of wind inside, but it was alwaysdead calm. I kept my own ship outside, and moored it to a rock at thevery end of the point; then I climbed a high rock to reconnoitre, butcould see no sign neither of man nor cattle, only some smoke risingfrom the ground. So I sent two of my company with an attendant to findout what sort of people the inhabitants were.“The men when they got on shore followed a level road by which thepeople draw their firewood from the mountains into the town, tillpresently they met a young woman who had come outside to fetch water,and who was daughter to a Laestrygonian named Antiphates. She was goingto the fountain Artacia from which the people bring in their water, andwhen my men had come close up to her, they asked her who the king ofthat country might be, and over what kind of people he ruled; so shedirected them to her father’s house, but when they got there they foundhis wife to be a giantess as huge as a mountain, and they werehorrified at the sight of her.“She at once called her husband Antiphates from the place of assembly,and forthwith he set about killing my men. He snatched up one of them,and began to make his dinner off him then and there, whereon the othertwo ran back to the ships as fast as ever they could. But Antiphatesraised a hue-and-cry after them, and thousands of sturdy Laestrygonianssprang up from every quarter—ogres, not men. They threw vast rocks atus from the cliffs as though they had been mere stones, and I heard thehorrid sound of the ships crunching up against one another, and thedeath cries of my men, as the Laestrygonians speared them like fishesand took them home to eat them. While they were thus killing my menwithin the harbour I drew my sword, cut the cable of my own ship, andtold my men to row with all their might if they too would not fare likethe rest; so they laid out for their lives, and we were thankful enoughwhen we got into open water out of reach of the rocks they hurled atus. As for the others there was not one of them left.“Thence we sailed sadly on, glad to have escaped death, though we hadlost our comrades, and came to the Aeaean island, where Circe lives—agreat and cunning goddess who is own sister to the magician Aeetes—forthey are both children of the sun by Perse, who is daughter to Oceanus.We brought our ship into a safe harbour without a word, for some godguided us thither, and having landed we lay there for two days and twonights, worn out in body and mind. When the morning of the third daycame I took my spear and my sword, and went away from the ship toreconnoitre, and see if I could discover signs of human handiwork, orhear the sound of voices. Climbing to the top of a high look-out Iespied the smoke of Circe’s house rising upwards amid a dense forest oftrees, and when I saw this I doubted whether, having seen the smoke, Iwould not go on at once and find out more, but in the end I deemed itbest to go back to the ship, give the men their dinners, and send someof them instead of going myself.“When I had nearly got back to the ship some god took pity upon mysolitude, and sent a fine antlered stag right into the middle of mypath. He was coming down his pasture in the forest to drink of theriver, for the heat of the sun drove him, and as he passed I struck himin the middle of the back; the bronze point of the spear went cleanthrough him, and he lay groaning in the dust until the life went out ofhim. Then I set my foot upon him, drew my spear from the wound, andlaid it down; I also gathered rough grass and rushes and twisted theminto a fathom or so of good stout rope, with which I bound the fourfeet of the noble creature together; having so done I hung him round myneck and walked back to the ship leaning upon my spear, for the stagwas much too big for me to be able to carry him on my shoulder,steadying him with one hand. As I threw him down in front of the ship,I called the men and spoke cheeringly man by man to each of them. ‘Lookhere my friends,’ said I, ‘we are not going to die so much before ourtime after all, and at any rate we will not starve so long as we havegot something to eat and drink on board.’ On this they uncovered theirheads upon the sea shore and admired the stag, for he was indeed asplendid fellow. Then, when they had feasted their eyes upon himsufficiently, they washed their hands and began to cook him for dinner.“Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we stayedthere eating and drinking our fill, but when the sun went down and itcame on dark, we camped upon the sea shore. When the child of morning,rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, I called a council and said, ‘My friends,we are in very great difficulties; listen therefore to me. We have noidea where the sun either sets or rises,85 so that we do not even knowEast from West. I see no way out of it; nevertheless, we must try andfind one. We are certainly on an island, for I went as high as I couldthis morning, and saw the sea reaching all round it to the horizon; itlies low, but towards the middle I saw smoke rising from out of a thickforest of trees.’“Their hearts sank as they heard me, for they remembered how they hadbeen treated by the Laestrygonian Antiphates, and by the savage ogrePolyphemus. They wept bitterly in their dismay, but there was nothingto be got by crying, so I divided them into two companies and set acaptain over each; I gave one company to Eurylochus, while I tookcommand of the other myself. Then we cast lots in a helmet, and the lotfell upon Eurylochus; so he set out with his twenty-two men, and theywept, as also did we who were left behind.“When they reached Circe’s house they found it built of cut stones, ona site that could be seen from far, in the middle of the forest. Therewere wild mountain wolves and lions prowling all round it—poorbewitched creatures whom she had tamed by her enchantments and druggedinto subjection. They did not attack my men, but wagged their greattails, fawned upon them, and rubbed their noses lovingly againstthem.86 As hounds crowd round their master when they see him comingfrom dinner—for they know he will bring them something—even so didthese wolves and lions with their great claws fawn upon my men, but themen were terribly frightened at seeing such strange creatures.Presently they reached the gates of the goddess’s house, and as theystood there they could hear Circe within, singing most beautifully asshe worked at her loom, making a web so fine, so soft, and of suchdazzling colours as no one but a goddess could weave. On this Polites,whom I valued and trusted more than any other of my men, said, ‘Thereis some one inside working at a loom and singing most beautifully; thewhole place resounds with it, let us call her and see whether she iswoman or goddess.’“They called her and she came down, unfastened the door, and bade thementer. They, thinking no evil, followed her, all except Eurylochus, whosuspected mischief and staid outside. When she had got them into herhouse, she set them upon benches and seats and mixed them a mess withcheese, honey, meal, and Pramnian wine, but she drugged it with wickedpoisons to make them forget their homes, and when they had drunk sheturned them into pigs by a stroke of her wand, and shut them up in herpig-styes. They were like pigs—head, hair, and all, and they gruntedjust as pigs do; but their senses were the same as before, and theyremembered everything.“Thus then were they shut up squealing, and Circe threw them someacorns and beech masts such as pigs eat, but Eurylochus hurried back totell me about the sad fate of our comrades. He was so overcome withdismay that though he tried to speak he could find no words to do so;his eyes filled with tears and he could only sob and sigh, till at lastwe forced his story out of him, and he told us what had happened to theothers.“‘We went,’ said he, ‘as you told us, through the forest, and in themiddle of it there was a fine house built with cut stones in a placethat could be seen from far. There we found a woman, or else she was agoddess, working at her loom and singing sweetly; so the men shouted toher and called her, whereon she at once came down, opened the door, andinvited us in. The others did not suspect any mischief so they followedher into the house, but I staid where I was, for I thought there mightbe some treachery. From that moment I saw them no more, for not one ofthem ever came out, though I sat a long time watching for them.’“Then I took my sword of bronze and slung it over my shoulders; I alsotook my bow, and told Eurylochus to come back with me and shew me theway. But he laid hold of me with both his hands and spoke piteously,saying, ‘Sir, do not force me to go with you, but let me stay here, forI know you will not bring one of them back with you, nor even returnalive yourself; let us rather see if we cannot escape at any rate withthe few that are left us, for we may still save our lives.’“‘Stay where you are, then,’ answered I, ‘eating and drinking at theship, but I must go, for I am most urgently bound to do so.’“With this I left the ship and went up inland. When I got through thecharmed grove, and was near the great house of the enchantress Circe, Imet Mercury with his golden wand, disguised as a young man in thehey-day of his youth and beauty with the down just coming upon hisface. He came up to me and took my hand within his own, saying, ‘Mypoor unhappy man, whither are you going over this mountain top, aloneand without knowing the way? Your men are shut up in Circe’s pigstyes,like so many wild boars in their lairs. You surely do not fancy thatyou can set them free? I can tell you that you will never get back andwill have to stay there with the rest of them. But never mind, I willprotect you and get you out of your difficulty. Take this herb, whichis one of great virtue, and keep it about you when you go to Circe’shouse, it will be a talisman to you against every kind of mischief.“‘And I will tell you of all the wicked witchcraft that Circe will tryto practice upon you. She will mix a mess for you to drink, and shewill drug the meal with which she makes it, but she will not be able tocharm you, for the virtue of the herb that I shall give you willprevent her spells from working. I will tell you all about it. WhenCirce strikes you with her wand, draw your sword and spring upon her asthough you were going to kill her. She will then be frightened, andwill desire you to go to bed with her; on this you must not point blankrefuse her, for you want her to set your companions free, and to takegood care also of yourself, but you must make her swear solemnly by allthe blessed gods that she will plot no further mischief against you, orelse when she has got you naked she will unman you and make you fit fornothing.’“As he spoke he pulled the herb out of the ground and shewed me what itwas like. The root was black, while the flower was as white as milk;the gods call it Moly, and mortal men cannot uproot it, but the godscan do whatever they like.“Then Mercury went back to high Olympus passing over the wooded island;but I fared onward to the house of Circe, and my heart was clouded withcare as I walked along. When I got to the gates I stood there andcalled the goddess, and as soon as she heard me she came down, openedthe door, and asked me to come in; so I followed her—much troubled inmy mind. She set me on a richly decorated seat inlaid with silver,there was a footstool also under my feet, and she mixed a mess in agolden goblet for me to drink; but she drugged it, for she meant memischief. When she had given it me, and I had drunk it without itscharming me, she struck me with her wand. ‘There now,’ she cried, ‘beoff to the pigstye, and make your lair with the rest of them.’“But I rushed at her with my sword drawn as though I would kill her,whereon she fell with a loud scream, clasped my knees, and spokepiteously, saying, ‘Who and whence are you? from what place and peoplehave you come? How can it be that my drugs have no power to charm you?Never yet was any man able to stand so much as a taste of the herb Igave you; you must be spell-proof; surely you can be none other thanthe bold hero Ulysses, who Mercury always said would come here some daywith his ship while on his way home from Troy; so be it then; sheatheyour sword and let us go to bed, that we may make friends and learn totrust each other.’“And I answered, ‘Circe, how can you expect me to be friendly with youwhen you have just been turning all my men into pigs? And now that youhave got me here myself, you mean me mischief when you ask me to go tobed with you, and will unman me and make me fit for nothing. I shallcertainly not consent to go to bed with you unless you will first takeyour solemn oath to plot no further harm against me.’“So she swore at once as I had told her, and when she had completed heroath then I went to bed with her.“Meanwhile her four servants, who are her housemaids, set about theirwork. They are the children of the groves and fountains, and of theholy waters that run down into the sea. One of them spread a fairpurple cloth over a seat, and laid a carpet underneath it. Anotherbrought tables of silver up to the seats, and set them with baskets ofgold. A third mixed some sweet wine with water in a silver bowl and putgolden cups upon the tables, while the fourth brought in water and setit to boil in a large cauldron over a good fire which she had lighted.When the water in the cauldron was boiling,87 she poured cold into ittill it was just as I liked it, and then she set me in a bath and beganwashing me from the cauldron about the head and shoulders, to take thetire and stiffness out of my limbs. As soon as she had done washing meand anointing me with oil, she arrayed me in a good cloak and shirt andled me to a richly decorated seat inlaid with silver; there was afootstool also under my feet. A maid servant then brought me water in abeautiful golden ewer and poured it into a silver basin for me to washmy hands, and she drew a clean table beside me; an upper servantbrought me bread and offered me many things of what there was in thehouse, and then Circe bade me eat, but I would not, and sat withoutheeding what was before me, still moody and suspicious.“When Circe saw me sitting there without eating, and in great grief,she came to me and said, ‘Ulysses, why do you sit like that as thoughyou were dumb, gnawing at your own heart, and refusing both meat anddrink? Is it that you are still suspicious? You ought not to be, for Ihave already sworn solemnly that I will not hurt you.’“And I said, ‘Circe, no man with any sense of what is right can thinkof either eating or drinking in your house until you have set hisfriends free and let him see them. If you want me to eat and drink, youmust free my men and bring them to me that I may see them with my owneyes.’“When I had said this she went straight through the court with her wandin her hand and opened the pigstye doors. My men came out like so manyprime hogs and stood looking at her, but she went about among them andanointed each with a second drug, whereon the bristles that the baddrug had given them fell off, and they became men again, younger thanthey were before, and much taller and better looking. They knew me atonce, seized me each of them by the hand, and wept for joy till thewhole house was filled with the sound of their halloa-ballooing, andCirce herself was so sorry for them that she came up to me and said,‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, go back at once to the sea where youhave left your ship, and first draw it on to the land. Then, hide allyour ship’s gear and property in some cave, and come back here withyour men.’“I agreed to this, so I went back to the sea shore, and found the menat the ship weeping and wailing most piteously. When they saw me thesilly blubbering fellows began frisking round me as calves break outand gambol round their mothers, when they see them coming home to bemilked after they have been feeding all day, and the homestead resoundswith their lowing. They seemed as glad to see me as though they had gotback to their own rugged Ithaca, where they had been born and bred.‘Sir,’ said the affectionate creatures, ‘we are as glad to see you backas though we had got safe home to Ithaca; but tell us all about thefate of our comrades.’“I spoke comfortingly to them and said, ‘We must draw our ship on tothe land, and hide the ship’s gear with all our property in some cave;then come with me all of you as fast as you can to Circe’s house, whereyou will find your comrades eating and drinking in the midst of greatabundance.’“On this the men would have come with me at once, but Eurylochus triedto hold them back and said, ‘Alas, poor wretches that we are, what willbecome of us? Rush not on your ruin by going to the house of Circe, whowill turn us all into pigs or wolves or lions, and we shall have tokeep guard over her house. Remember how the Cyclops treated us when ourcomrades went inside his cave, and Ulysses with them. It was allthrough his sheer folly that those men lost their lives.’“When I heard him I was in two minds whether or no to draw the keenblade that hung by my sturdy thigh and cut his head off in spite of hisbeing a near relation of my own; but the men interceded for him andsaid, ‘Sir, if it may so be, let this fellow stay here and mind theship, but take the rest of us with you to Circe’s house.’“On this we all went inland, and Eurylochus was not left behind afterall, but came on too, for he was frightened by the severe reprimandthat I had given him.“Meanwhile Circe had been seeing that the men who had been left behindwere washed and anointed with olive oil; she had also given themwoollen cloaks and shirts, and when we came we found them allcomfortably at dinner in her house. As soon as the men saw each otherface to face and knew one another, they wept for joy and cried aloudtill the whole palace rang again. Thereon Circe came up to me and said,‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, tell your men to leave off crying; Iknow how much you have all of you suffered at sea, and how ill you havefared among cruel savages on the mainland, but that is over now, sostay here, and eat and drink till you are once more as strong andhearty as you were when you left Ithaca; for at present you areweakened both in body and mind; you keep all the time thinking of thehardships you have suffered during your travels, so that you have nomore cheerfulness left in you.’“Thus did she speak and we assented. We stayed with Circe for a wholetwelvemonth feasting upon an untold quantity both of meat and wine. Butwhen the year had passed in the waning of moons and the long days hadcome round, my men called me apart and said, ‘Sir, it is time you beganto think about going home, if so be you are to be spared to see yourhouse and native country at all.’“Thus did they speak and I assented. Thereon through the livelong dayto the going down of the sun we feasted our fill on meat and wine, butwhen the sun went down and it came on dark the men laid themselves downto sleep in the covered cloisters. I, however, after I had got into bedwith Circe, besought her by her knees, and the goddess listened to whatI had got to say. ‘Circe,’ said I, ‘please to keep the promise you mademe about furthering me on my homeward voyage. I want to get back and sodo my men, they are always pestering me with their complaints as soonas ever your back is turned.’“And the goddess answered, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, you shallnone of you stay here any longer if you do not want to, but there isanother journey which you have got to take before you can sailhomewards. You must go to the house of Hades and of dread Proserpine toconsult the ghost of the blind Theban prophet Teiresias, whose reasonis still unshaken. To him alone has Proserpine left his understandingeven in death, but the other ghosts flit about aimlessly.’“I was dismayed when I heard this. I sat up in bed and wept, and wouldgladly have lived no longer to see the light of the sun, but presentlywhen I was tired of weeping and tossing myself about, I said, ‘And whoshall guide me upon this voyage—for the house of Hades is a port thatno ship can reach.’“‘You will want no guide,’ she answered; ‘raise your mast, set yourwhite sails, sit quite still, and the North Wind will blow you there ofitself. When your ship has traversed the waters of Oceanus, you willreach the fertile shore of Proserpine’s country with its groves of tallpoplars and willows that shed their fruit untimely; here beach yourship upon the shore of Oceanus, and go straight on to the dark abode ofHades. You will find it near the place where the rivers Pyriphlegethonand Cocytus (which is a branch of the river Styx) flow into Acheron,and you will see a rock near it, just where the two roaring rivers runinto one another.“‘When you have reached this spot, as I now tell you, dig a trench acubit or so in length, breadth, and depth, and pour into it as adrink-offering to all the dead, first, honey mixed with milk, thenwine, and in the third place water—sprinkling white barley meal overthe whole. Moreover you must offer many prayers to the poor feebleghosts, and promise them that when you get back to Ithaca you willsacrifice a barren heifer to them, the best you have, and will load thepyre with good things. More particularly you must promise thatTeiresias shall have a black sheep all to himself, the finest in allyour flocks.“‘When you shall have thus besought the ghosts with your prayers, offerthem a ram and a black ewe, bending their heads towards Erebus; butyourself turn away from them as though you would make towards theriver. On this, many dead men’s ghosts will come to you, and you musttell your men to skin the two sheep that you have just killed, andoffer them as a burnt sacrifice with prayers to Hades and toProserpine. Then draw your sword and sit there, so as to prevent anyother poor ghost from coming near the spilt blood before Teiresiasshall have answered your questions. The seer will presently come toyou, and will tell you about your voyage—what stages you are to make,and how you are to sail the sea so as to reach your home.’“It was day-break by the time she had done speaking, so she dressed mein my shirt and cloak. As for herself she threw a beautiful lightgossamer fabric over her shoulders, fastening it with a golden girdleround her waist, and she covered her head with a mantle. Then I wentabout among the men everywhere all over the house, and spoke kindly toeach of them man by man: ‘You must not lie sleeping here any longer,’said I to them, ‘we must be going, for Circe has told me all about it.’And on this they did as I bade them.“Even so, however, I did not get them away without misadventure. We hadwith us a certain youth named Elpenor, not very remarkable for sense orcourage, who had got drunk and was lying on the house-top away from therest of the men, to sleep off his liquor in the cool. When he heard thenoise of the men bustling about, he jumped up on a sudden and forgotall about coming down by the main staircase, so he tumbled right offthe roof and broke his neck, and his soul went down to the house ofHades.“When I had got the men together I said to them, ‘You think you areabout to start home again, but Circe has explained to me that insteadof this, we have got to go to the house of Hades and Proserpine toconsult the ghost of the Theban prophet Teiresias.’“The men were broken-hearted as they heard me, and threw themselves onthe ground groaning and tearing their hair, but they did not mendmatters by crying. When we reached the sea shore, weeping and lamentingour fate, Circe brought the ram and the ewe, and we made them fast hardby the ship. She passed through the midst of us without our knowing it,for who can see the comings and goings of a god, if the god does notwish to be seen?BOOK XITHE VISIT TO THE DEAD.88“Then, when we had got down to the sea shore we drew our ship into thewater and got her mast and sails into her; we also put the sheep onboard and took our places, weeping and in great distress of mind.Circe, that great and cunning goddess, sent us a fair wind that blewdead aft and staid steadily with us keeping our sails all the time wellfilled; so we did whatever wanted doing to the ship’s gear and let hergo as the wind and helmsman headed her. All day long her sails werefull as she held her course over the sea, but when the sun went downand darkness was over all the earth, we got into the deep waters of theriver Oceanus, where lie the land and city of the Cimmerians who liveenshrouded in mist and darkness which the rays of the sun never pierceneither at his rising nor as he goes down again out of the heavens, butthe poor wretches live in one long melancholy night. When we got therewe beached the ship, took the sheep out of her, and went along by thewaters of Oceanus till we came to the place of which Circe had told us.“Here Perimedes and Eurylochus held the victims, while I drew my swordand dug the trench a cubit each way. I made a drink-offering to all thedead, first with honey and milk, then with wine, and thirdly withwater, and I sprinkled white barley meal over the whole, prayingearnestly to the poor feckless ghosts, and promising them that when Igot back to Ithaca I would sacrifice a barren heifer for them, the bestI had, and would load the pyre with good things. I also particularlypromised that Teiresias should have a black sheep to himself, the bestin all my flocks. When I had prayed sufficiently to the dead, I cut thethroats of the two sheep and let the blood run into the trench, whereonthe ghosts came trooping up from Erebus—brides,89 young bachelors, oldmen worn out with toil, maids who had been crossed in love, and bravemen who had been killed in battle, with their armour still smirchedwith blood; they came from every quarter and flitted round the trenchwith a strange kind of screaming sound that made me turn pale withfear. When I saw them coming I told the men to be quick and flay thecarcasses of the two dead sheep and make burnt offerings of them, andat the same time to repeat prayers to Hades and to Proserpine; but Isat where I was with my sword drawn and would not let the poor fecklessghosts come near the blood till Teiresias should have answered myquestions.“The first ghost that came was that of my comrade Elpenor, for he hadnot yet been laid beneath the earth. We had left his body unwaked andunburied in Circe’s house, for we had had too much else to do. I wasvery sorry for him, and cried when I saw him: ‘Elpenor,’ said I, ‘howdid you come down here into this gloom and darkness? You have got hereon foot quicker than I have with my ship.’“‘Sir,’ he answered with a groan, ‘it was all bad luck, and my ownunspeakable drunkenness. I was lying asleep on the top of Circe’shouse, and never thought of coming down again by the great staircasebut fell right off the roof and broke my neck, so my soul came down tothe house of Hades. And now I beseech you by all those whom you haveleft behind you, though they are not here, by your wife, by the fatherwho brought you up when you were a child, and by Telemachus who is theone hope of your house, do what I shall now ask you. I know that whenyou leave this limbo you will again hold your ship for the Aeaeanisland. Do not go thence leaving me unwaked and unburied behind you, orI may bring heaven’s anger upon you; but burn me with whatever armour Ihave, build a barrow for me on the sea shore, that may tell people indays to come what a poor unlucky fellow I was, and plant over my gravethe oar I used to row with when I was yet alive and with my messmates.’And I said, ‘My poor fellow, I will do all that you have asked of me.’“Thus, then, did we sit and hold sad talk with one another, I on theone side of the trench with my sword held over the blood, and the ghostof my comrade saying all this to me from the other side. Then came theghost of my dead mother Anticlea, daughter to Autolycus. I had left heralive when I set out for Troy and was moved to tears when I saw her,but even so, for all my sorrow I would not let her come near the bloodtill I had asked my questions of Teiresias.“Then came also the ghost of Theban Teiresias, with his golden sceptrein his hand. He knew me and said, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, why,poor man, have you left the light of day and come down to visit thedead in this sad place? Stand back from the trench and withdraw yoursword that I may drink of the blood and answer your questions truly.’“So I drew back, and sheathed my sword, whereon when he had drank ofthe blood he began with his prophecy.“‘You want to know,’ said he, ‘about your return home, but heaven willmake this hard for you. I do not think that you will escape the eye ofNeptune, who still nurses his bitter grudge against you for havingblinded his son. Still, after much suffering you may get home if youcan restrain yourself and your companions when your ship reaches theThrinacian island, where you will find the sheep and cattle belongingto the sun, who sees and gives ear to everything. If you leave theseflocks unharmed and think of nothing but of getting home, you may yetafter much hardship reach Ithaca; but if you harm them, then I forewarnyou of the destruction both of your ship and of your men. Even thoughyou may yourself escape, you will return in bad plight after losing allyour men, [in another man’s ship, and you will find trouble in yourhouse, which will be overrun by high-handed people, who are devouringyour substance under the pretext of paying court and making presents toyour wife.“‘When you get home you will take your revenge on these suitors; andafter you have killed them by force or fraud in your own house, youmust take a well made oar and carry it on and on, till you come to acountry where the people have never heard of the sea and do not evenmix salt with their food, nor do they know anything about ships, andoars that are as the wings of a ship. I will give you this certaintoken which cannot escape your notice. A wayfarer will meet you andwill say it must be a winnowing shovel that you have got upon yourshoulder; on this you must fix the oar in the ground and sacrifice aram, a bull, and a boar to Neptune.90 Then go home and offer hecatombsto all the gods in heaven one after the other. As for yourself, deathshall come to you from the sea, and your life shall ebb away verygently when you are full of years and peace of mind, and your peopleshall bless you. All that I have said will come true].’91“‘This,’ I answered, ‘must be as it may please heaven, but tell me andtell me and tell me true, I see my poor mother’s ghost close by us; sheis sitting by the blood without saying a word, and though I am her ownson she does not remember me and speak to me; tell me, Sir, how I canmake her know me.’“‘That,’ said he, ‘I can soon do. Any ghost that you let taste of theblood will talk with you like a reasonable being, but if you do not letthem have any blood they will go away again.’“On this the ghost of Teiresias went back to the house of Hades, forhis prophecyings had now been spoken, but I sat still where I was untilmy mother came up and tasted the blood. Then she knew me at once andspoke fondly to me, saying, ‘My son, how did you come down to thisabode of darkness while you are still alive? It is a hard thing for theliving to see these places, for between us and them there are great andterrible waters, and there is Oceanus, which no man can cross on foot,but he must have a good ship to take him. Are you all this time tryingto find your way home from Troy, and have you never yet got back toIthaca nor seen your wife in your own house?’“‘Mother,’ said I, ‘I was forced to come here to consult the ghost ofthe Theban prophet Teiresias. I have never yet been near the Achaeanland nor set foot on my native country, and I have had nothing but onelong series of misfortunes from the very first day that I set out withAgamemnon for Ilius, the land of noble steeds, to fight the Trojans.But tell me, and tell me true, in what way did you die? Did you have along illness, or did heaven vouchsafe you a gentle easy passage toeternity? Tell me also about my father, and the son whom I left behindme, is my property still in their hands, or has some one else got holdof it, who thinks that I shall not return to claim it? Tell me againwhat my wife intends doing, and in what mind she is; does she live withmy son and guard my estate securely, or has she made the best match shecould and married again?’“My mother answered, ‘Your wife still remains in your house, but she isin great distress of mind and spends her whole time in tears both nightand day. No one as yet has got possession of your fine property, andTelemachus still holds your lands undisturbed. He has to entertainlargely, as of course he must, considering his position as amagistrate,92 and how every one invites him; your father remains at hisold place in the country and never goes near the town. He has nocomfortable bed nor bedding; in the winter he sleeps on the floor infront of the fire with the men and goes about all in rags, but insummer, when the warm weather comes on again, he lies out in thevineyard on a bed of vine leaves thrown any how upon the ground. Hegrieves continually about your never having come home, and suffers moreand more as he grows older. As for my own end it was in this wise:heaven did not take me swiftly and painlessly in my own house, nor wasI attacked by any illness such as those that generally wear people outand kill them, but my longing to know what you were doing and the forceof my affection for you—this it was that was the death of me.’93“Then I tried to find some way of embracing my poor mother’s ghost.Thrice I sprang towards her and tried to clasp her in my arms, but eachtime she flitted from my embrace as it were a dream or phantom, andbeing touched to the quick I said to her, ‘Mother, why do you not staystill when I would embrace you? If we could throw our arms around oneanother we might find sad comfort in the sharing of our sorrows even inthe house of Hades; does Proserpine want to lay a still further load ofgrief upon me by mocking me with a phantom only?’“‘My son,’ she answered, ‘most ill-fated of all mankind, it is notProserpine that is beguiling you, but all people are like this whenthey are dead. The sinews no longer hold the flesh and bones together;these perish in the fierceness of consuming fire as soon as life hasleft the body, and the soul flits away as though it were a dream. Now,however, go back to the light of day as soon as you can, and note allthese things that you may tell them to your wife hereafter.’“Thus did we converse, and anon Proserpine sent up the ghosts of thewives and daughters of all the most famous men. They gathered in crowdsabout the blood, and I considered how I might question them severally.In the end I deemed that it would be best to draw the keen blade thathung by my sturdy thigh, and keep them from all drinking the blood atonce. So they came up one after the other, and each one as I questionedher told me her race and lineage.“The first I saw was Tyro. She was daughter of Salmoneus and wife ofCretheus the son of Aeolus.94 She fell in love with the river Enipeuswho is much the most beautiful river in the whole world. Once when shewas taking a walk by his side as usual, Neptune, disguised as herlover, lay with her at the mouth of the river, and a huge blue wavearched itself like a mountain over them to hide both woman and god,whereon he loosed her virgin girdle and laid her in a deep slumber.When the god had accomplished the deed of love, he took her hand in hisown and said, ‘Tyro, rejoice in all good will; the embraces of the godsare not fruitless, and you will have fine twins about this time twelvemonths. Take great care of them. I am Neptune, so now go home, but holdyour tongue and do not tell any one.’“Then he dived under the sea, and she in due course bore Pelias andNeleus, who both of them served Jove with all their might. Pelias was agreat breeder of sheep and lived in Iolcus, but the other lived inPylos. The rest of her children were by Cretheus, namely, Aeson,Pheres, and Amythaon, who was a mighty warrior and charioteer.“Next to her I saw Antiope, daughter to Asopus, who could boast ofhaving slept in the arms of even Jove himself, and who bore him twosons Amphion and Zethus. These founded Thebes with its seven gates, andbuilt a wall all round it; for strong though they were they could nothold Thebes till they had walled it.“Then I saw Alcmena, the wife of Amphitryon, who also bore to Joveindomitable Hercules; and Megara who was daughter to great King Creon,and married the redoubtable son of Amphitryon.“I also saw fair Epicaste mother of king Oedipodes whose awful lot itwas to marry her own son without suspecting it. He married her afterhaving killed his father, but the gods proclaimed the whole story tothe world; whereon he remained king of Thebes, in great grief for thespite the gods had borne him; but Epicaste went to the house of themighty jailor Hades, having hanged herself for grief, and the avengingspirits haunted him as for an outraged mother—to his ruing bitterlythereafter.“Then I saw Chloris, whom Neleus married for her beauty, having givenpriceless presents for her. She was youngest daughter to Amphion son ofIasus and king of Minyan Orchomenus, and was Queen in Pylos. She boreNestor, Chromius, and Periclymenus, and she also bore that marvellouslylovely woman Pero, who was wooed by all the country round; but Neleuswould only give her to him who should raid the cattle of Iphicles fromthe grazing grounds of Phylace, and this was a hard task. The only manwho would undertake to raid them was a certain excellent seer,95 butthe will of heaven was against him, for the rangers of the cattlecaught him and put him in prison; nevertheless when a full year hadpassed and the same season came round again, Iphicles set him atliberty, after he had expounded all the oracles of heaven. Thus, then,was the will of Jove accomplished.“And I saw Leda the wife of Tyndarus, who bore him two famous sons,Castor breaker of horses, and Pollux the mighty boxer. Both theseheroes are lying under the earth, though they are still alive, for by aspecial dispensation of Jove, they die and come to life again, each oneof them every other day throughout all time, and they have the rank ofgods.“After her I saw Iphimedeia wife of Aloeus who boasted the embrace ofNeptune. She bore two sons Otus and Ephialtes, but both were shortlived. They were the finest children that were ever born in this world,and the best looking, Orion only excepted; for at nine years old theywere nine fathoms high, and measured nine cubits round the chest. Theythreatened to make war with the gods in Olympus, and tried to set MountOssa on the top of Mount Olympus, and Mount Pelion on the top of Ossa,that they might scale heaven itself, and they would have done it too ifthey had been grown up, but Apollo, son of Leto, killed both of them,before they had got so much as a sign of hair upon their cheeks orchin.“Then I saw Phaedra, and Procris, and fair Ariadne daughter of themagician Minos, whom Theseus was carrying off from Crete to Athens, buthe did not enjoy her, for before he could do so Diana killed her in theisland of Dia on account of what Bacchus had said against her.“I also saw Maera and Clymene and hateful Eriphyle, who sold her ownhusband for gold. But it would take me all night if I were to nameevery single one of the wives and daughters of heroes whom I saw, andit is time for me to go to bed, either on board ship with my crew, orhere. As for my escort, heaven and yourselves will see to it.”Here he ended, and the guests sat all of them enthralled and speechlessthroughout the covered cloister. Then Arete said to them:—“What do you think of this man, O Phaeacians? Is he not tall and goodlooking, and is he not clever? True, he is my own guest, but all of youshare in the distinction. Do not be in a hurry to send him away, norniggardly in the presents you make to one who is in such great need,for heaven has blessed all of you with great abundance.”Then spoke the aged hero Echeneus who was one of the oldest men amongthem, “My friends,” said he, “what our august queen has just said to usis both reasonable and to the purpose, therefore be persuaded by it;but the decision whether in word or deed rests ultimately with KingAlcinous.”“The thing shall be done,” exclaimed Alcinous, “as surely as I stilllive and reign over the Phaeacians. Our guest is indeed very anxious toget home, still we must persuade him to remain with us until to-morrow,by which time I shall be able to get together the whole sum that I meanto give him. As regards his escort it will be a matter for you all, andmine above all others as the chief person among you.”And Ulysses answered, “King Alcinous, if you were to bid me to stayhere for a whole twelve months, and then speed me on my way, loadedwith your noble gifts, I should obey you gladly and it would redoundgreatly to my advantage, for I should return fuller-handed to my ownpeople, and should thus be more respected and beloved by all who see mewhen I get back to Ithaca.”“Ulysses,” replied Alcinous, “not one of us who sees you has any ideathat you are a charlatan or a swindler. I know there are many peoplegoing about who tell such plausible stories that it is very hard to seethrough them, but there is a style about your language which assures meof your good disposition. Moreover you have told the story of your ownmisfortunes, and those of the Argives, as though you were a practicedbard; but tell me, and tell me true, whether you saw any of the mightyheroes who went to Troy at the same time with yourself, and perishedthere. The evenings are still at their longest, and it is not yet bedtime—go on, therefore, with your divine story, for I could stay herelistening till tomorrow morning, so long as you will continue to tellus of your adventures.”“Alcinous,” answered Ulysses, “there is a time for making speeches, anda time for going to bed; nevertheless, since you so desire, I will notrefrain from telling you the still sadder tale of those of my comradeswho did not fall fighting with the Trojans, but perished on theirreturn, through the treachery of a wicked woman.“When Proserpine had dismissed the female ghosts in all directions, theghost of Agamemnon son of Atreus came sadly up to me, surrounded bythose who had perished with him in the house of Aegisthus. As soon ashe had tasted the blood, he knew me, and weeping bitterly stretched outhis arms towards me to embrace me; but he had no strength nor substanceany more, and I too wept and pitied him as I beheld him. ‘How did youcome by your death,’ said I, ‘King Agamemnon? Did Neptune raise hiswinds and waves against you when you were at sea, or did your enemiesmake an end of you on the main land when you were cattle-lifting orsheep-stealing, or while they were fighting in defence of their wivesand city?’“‘Ulysses,’ he answered, ‘noble son of Laertes, I was not lost at seain any storm of Neptune’s raising, nor did my foes despatch me upon themainland, but Aegisthus and my wicked wife were the death of me betweenthem. He asked me to his house, feasted me, and then butchered me mostmiserably as though I were a fat beast in a slaughter house, while allaround me my comrades were slain like sheep or pigs for the weddingbreakfast, or picnic, or gorgeous banquet of some great nobleman. Youmust have seen numbers of men killed either in a general engagement, orin single combat, but you never saw anything so truly pitiable as theway in which we fell in that cloister, with the mixing bowl and theloaded tables lying all about, and the ground reeking with our blood. Iheard Priam’s daughter Cassandra scream as Clytemnestra killed herclose beside me. I lay dying upon the earth with the sword in my body,and raised my hands to kill the slut of a murderess, but she slippedaway from me; she would not even close my lips nor my eyes when I wasdying, for there is nothing in this world so cruel and so shameless asa woman when she has fallen into such guilt as hers was. Fancymurdering her own husband! I thought I was going to be welcomed home bymy children and my servants, but her abominable crime has broughtdisgrace on herself and all women who shall come after—even on the goodones.’“And I said, ‘In truth Jove has hated the house of Atreus from first tolast in the matter of their women’s counsels. See how many of us fellfor Helen’s sake, and now it seems that Clytemnestra hatched mischiefagainst you too during your absence.’“‘Be sure, therefore,’ continued Agamemnon, ‘and not be too friendlyeven with your own wife. Do not tell her all that you know perfectlywell yourself. Tell her a part only, and keep your own counsel aboutthe rest. Not that your wife, Ulysses, is likely to murder you, forPenelope is a very admirable woman, and has an excellent nature. Weleft her a young bride with an infant at her breast when we set out forTroy. This child no doubt is now grown up happily to man’s estate,96and he and his father will have a joyful meeting and embrace oneanother as it is right they should do, whereas my wicked wife did noteven allow me the happiness of looking upon my son, but killed me ere Icould do so. Furthermore I say—and lay my saying to your heart—do nottell people when you are bringing your ship to Ithaca, but steal amarch upon them, for after all this there is no trusting women. But nowtell me, and tell me true, can you give me any news of my son Orestes?Is he in Orchomenus, or at Pylos, or is he at Sparta with Menelaus—forI presume that he is still living.’“And I said, ‘Agamemnon, why do you ask me? I do not know whether yourson is alive or dead, and it is not right to talk when one does notknow.’“As we two sat weeping and talking thus sadly with one another theghost of Achilles came up to us with Patroclus, Antilochus, and Ajaxwho was the finest and goodliest man of all the Danaans after the sonof Peleus. The fleet descendant of Aeacus knew me and spoke piteously,saying, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, what deed of daring will youundertake next, that you venture down to the house of Hades among ussilly dead, who are but the ghosts of them that can labour no more?’“And I said, ‘Achilles, son of Peleus, foremost champion of theAchaeans, I came to consult Teiresias, and see if he could advise meabout my return home to Ithaca, for I have never yet been able to getnear the Achaean land, nor to set foot in my own country, but have beenin trouble all the time. As for you, Achilles, no one was ever yet sofortunate as you have been, nor ever will be, for you were adored byall us Argives as long as you were alive, and now that you are here youare a great prince among the dead. Do not, therefore, take it so muchto heart even if you are dead.’“‘Say not a word,’ he answered, ‘in death’s favour; I would rather be apaid servant in a poor man’s house and be above ground than king ofkings among the dead. But give me news about my son; is he gone to thewars and will he be a great soldier, or is this not so? Tell me also ifyou have heard anything about my father Peleus—does he still rule amongthe Myrmidons, or do they show him no respect throughout Hellas andPhthia now that he is old and his limbs fail him? Could I but stand byhis side, in the light of day, with the same strength that I had when Ikilled the bravest of our foes upon the plain of Troy—could I but be asI then was and go even for a short time to my father’s house, any onewho tried to do him violence or supersede him would soon rue it.’“‘I have heard nothing,’ I answered, ‘of Peleus, but I can tell you allabout your son Neoptolemus, for I took him in my own ship from Scyroswith the Achaeans. In our councils of war before Troy he was alwaysfirst to speak, and his judgement was unerring. Nestor and I were theonly two who could surpass him; and when it came to fighting on theplain of Troy, he would never remain with the body of his men, butwould dash on far in front, foremost of them all in valour. Many a mandid he kill in battle—I cannot name every single one of those whom heslew while fighting on the side of the Argives, but will only say howhe killed that valiant hero Eurypylus son of Telephus, who was thehandsomest man I ever saw except Memnon; many others also of theCeteians fell around him by reason of a woman’s bribes. Moreover, whenall the bravest of the Argives went inside the horse that Epeus hadmade, and it was left to me to settle when we should either open thedoor of our ambuscade, or close it, though all the other leaders andchief men among the Danaans were drying their eyes and quaking in everylimb, I never once saw him turn pale nor wipe a tear from his cheek; hewas all the time urging me to break out from the horse—grasping thehandle of his sword and his bronze-shod spear, and breathing furyagainst the foe. Yet when we had sacked the city of Priam he got hishandsome share of the prize money and went on board (such is thefortune of war) without a wound upon him, neither from a thrown spearnor in close combat, for the rage of Mars is a matter of great chance.’“When I had told him this, the ghost of Achilles strode off across ameadow full of asphodel, exulting over what I had said concerning theprowess of his son.“The ghosts of other dead men stood near me and told me each his ownmelancholy tale; but that of Ajax son of Telamon alone held aloof—stillangry with me for having won the cause in our dispute about the armourof Achilles. Thetis had offered it as a prize, but the Trojan prisonersand Minerva were the judges. Would that I had never gained the day insuch a contest, for it cost the life of Ajax, who was foremost of allthe Danaans after the son of Peleus, alike in stature and prowess.“When I saw him I tried to pacify him and said, ‘Ajax, will you notforget and forgive even in death, but must the judgement about thathateful armour still rankle with you? It cost us Argives dear enough tolose such a tower of strength as you were to us. We mourned you as muchas we mourned Achilles son of Peleus himself, nor can the blame be laidon anything but on the spite which Jove bore against the Danaans, forit was this that made him counsel your destruction—come hither,therefore, bring your proud spirit into subjection, and hear what I cantell you.’“He would not answer, but turned away to Erebus and to the otherghosts; nevertheless, I should have made him talk to me in spite of hisbeing so angry, or I should have gone on talking to him,97 only thatthere were still others among the dead whom I desired to see.“Then I saw Minos son of Jove with his golden sceptre in his handsitting in judgement on the dead, and the ghosts were gathered sittingand standing round him in the spacious house of Hades, to learn hissentences upon them.“After him I saw huge Orion in a meadow full of asphodel driving theghosts of the wild beasts that he had killed upon the mountains, and hehad a great bronze club in his hand, unbreakable for ever and ever.“And I saw Tityus son of Gaia stretched upon the plain and coveringsome nine acres of ground. Two vultures on either side of him weredigging their beaks into his liver, and he kept on trying to beat themoff with his hands, but could not; for he had violated Jove’s mistressLeto as she was going through Panopeus on her way to Pytho.“I saw also the dreadful fate of Tantalus, who stood in a lake thatreached his chin; he was dying to quench his thirst, but could neverreach the water, for whenever the poor creature stooped to drink, itdried up and vanished, so that there was nothing but dry ground—parchedby the spite of heaven. There were tall trees, moreover, that shedtheir fruit over his head—pears, pomegranates, apples, sweet figs andjuicy olives, but whenever the poor creature stretched out his hand totake some, the wind tossed the branches back again to the clouds.“And I saw Sisyphus at his endless task raising his prodigious stonewith both his hands. With hands and feet he tried to roll it up to thetop of the hill, but always, just before he could roll it over on tothe other side, its weight would be too much for him, and the pitilessstone98 would come thundering down again on to the plain. Then he wouldbegin trying to push it up hill again, and the sweat ran off him andthe steam rose after him.“After him I saw mighty Hercules, but it was his phantom only, for heis feasting ever with the immortal gods, and has lovely Hebe to wife,who is daughter of Jove and Juno. The ghosts were screaming round himlike scared birds flying all whithers. He looked black as night withhis bare bow in his hands and his arrow on the string, glaring aroundas though ever on the point of taking aim. About his breast there was awondrous golden belt adorned in the most marvellous fashion with bears,wild boars, and lions with gleaming eyes; there was also war, battle,and death. The man who made that belt, do what he might, would never beable to make another like it. Hercules knew me at once when he saw me,and spoke piteously, saying, ‘My poor Ulysses, noble son of Laertes,are you too leading the same sorry kind of life that I did when I wasabove ground? I was son of Jove, but I went through an infinity ofsuffering, for I became bondsman to one who was far beneath me—a lowfellow who set me all manner of labours. He once sent me here to fetchthe hell-hound—for he did not think he could find anything harder forme than this, but I got the hound out of Hades and brought him to him,for Mercury and Minerva helped me.’“On this Hercules went down again into the house of Hades, but I stayedwhere I was in case some other of the mighty dead should come to me.And I should have seen still other of them that are gone before, whom Iwould fain have seen—Theseus and Pirithous—glorious children of thegods, but so many thousands of ghosts came round me and uttered suchappalling cries, that I was panic stricken lest Proserpine should sendup from the house of Hades the head of that awful monster Gorgon. Onthis I hastened back to my ship and ordered my men to go on board atonce and loose the hawsers; so they embarked and took their places,whereon the ship went down the stream of the river Oceanus. We had torow at first, but presently a fair wind sprang up.BOOK XIITHE SIRENS, SCYLLA AND CHARYBDIS, THE CATTLE OF THE SUN.“After we were clear of the river Oceanus, and had got out into theopen sea, we went on till we reached the Aeaean island where there isdawn and sun-rise as in other places. We then drew our ship on to thesands and got out of her on to the shore, where we went to sleep andwaited till day should break.“Then, when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, I sentsome men to Circe’s house to fetch the body of Elpenor. We cut firewoodfrom a wood where the headland jutted out into the sea, and after wehad wept over him and lamented him we performed his funeral rites. Whenhis body and armour had been burned to ashes, we raised a cairn, set astone over it, and at the top of the cairn we fixed the oar that he hadbeen used to row with.“While we were doing all this, Circe, who knew that we had got backfrom the house of Hades, dressed herself and came to us as fast as shecould; and her maid servants came with her bringing us bread, meat, andwine. Then she stood in the midst of us and said, ‘You have done a boldthing in going down alive to the house of Hades, and you will have diedtwice, to other people’s once; now, then, stay here for the rest of theday, feast your fill, and go on with your voyage at daybreak tomorrowmorning. In the meantime I will tell Ulysses about your course, andwill explain everything to him so as to prevent your suffering frommisadventure either by land or sea.’“We agreed to do as she had said, and feasted through the livelong dayto the going down of the sun, but when the sun had set and it came ondark, the men laid themselves down to sleep by the stern cables of theship. Then Circe took me by the hand and bade me be seated away fromthe others, while she reclined by my side and asked me all about ouradventures.“‘So far so good,’ said she, when I had ended my story, ‘and now payattention to what I am about to tell you—heaven itself, indeed, willrecall it to your recollection. First you will come to the Sirens whoenchant all who come near them. If any one unwarily draws in too closeand hears the singing of the Sirens, his wife and children will neverwelcome him home again, for they sit in a green field and warble him todeath with the sweetness of their song. There is a great heap of deadmen’s bones lying all around, with the flesh still rotting off them.Therefore pass these Sirens by, and stop your men’s ears with wax thatnone of them may hear; but if you like you can listen yourself, for youmay get the men to bind you as you stand upright on a cross piece halfway up the mast,99 and they must lash the rope’s ends to the mastitself, that you may have the pleasure of listening. If you beg andpray the men to unloose you, then they must bind you faster.“‘When your crew have taken you past these Sirens, I cannot give youcoherent directions100 as to which of two courses you are to take; Iwill lay the two alternatives before you, and you must consider themfor yourself. On the one hand there are some overhanging rocks againstwhich the deep blue waves of Amphitrite beat with terrific fury; theblessed gods call these rocks the Wanderers. Here not even a bird maypass, no, not even the timid doves that bring ambrosia to Father Jove,but the sheer rock always carries off one of them, and Father Jove hasto send another to make up their number; no ship that ever yet came tothese rocks has got away again, but the waves and whirlwinds of fireare freighted with wreckage and with the bodies of dead men. The onlyvessel that ever sailed and got through, was the famous Argo on her wayfrom the house of Aetes, and she too would have gone against thesegreat rocks, only that Juno piloted her past them for the love she boreto Jason.“‘Of these two rocks the one reaches heaven and its peak is lost in adark cloud. This never leaves it, so that the top is never clear noteven in summer and early autumn. No man though he had twenty hands andtwenty feet could get a foothold on it and climb it, for it runs sheerup, as smooth as though it had been polished. In the middle of it thereis a large cavern, looking West and turned towards Erebus; you musttake your ship this way, but the cave is so high up that not even thestoutest archer could send an arrow into it. Inside it Scylla sits andyelps with a voice that you might take to be that of a young hound, butin truth she is a dreadful monster and no one—not even a god—could faceher without being terror-struck. She has twelve mis-shapen feet, andsix necks of the most prodigious length; and at the end of each neckshe has a frightful head with three rows of teeth in each, all set veryclose together, so that they would crunch any one to death in a moment,and she sits deep within her shady cell thrusting out her heads andpeering all round the rock, fishing for dolphins or dogfish or anylarger monster that she can catch, of the thousands with whichAmphitrite teems. No ship ever yet got past her without losing somemen, for she shoots out all her heads at once, and carries off a man ineach mouth.“‘You will find the other rock lie lower, but they are so closetogether that there is not more than a bow-shot between them. [A largefig tree in full leaf101 grows upon it], and under it lies the suckingwhirlpool of Charybdis. Three times in the day does she vomit forth herwaters, and three times she sucks them down again; see that you be notthere when she is sucking, for if you are, Neptune himself could notsave you; you must hug the Scylla side and drive ship by as fast as youcan, for you had better lose six men than your whole crew.’“‘Is there no way,’ said I, ‘of escaping Charybdis, and at the sametime keeping Scylla off when she is trying to harm my men?’“‘You dare devil,’ replied the goddess, ‘you are always wanting tofight somebody or something; you will not let yourself be beaten evenby the immortals. For Scylla is not mortal; moreover she is savage,extreme, rude, cruel and invincible. There is no help for it; your bestchance will be to get by her as fast as ever you can, for if you dawdleabout her rock while you are putting on your armour, she may catch youwith a second cast of her six heads, and snap up another half dozen ofyour men; so drive your ship past her at full speed, and roar outlustily to Crataiis who is Scylla’s dam, bad luck to her; she will thenstop her from making a second raid upon you.’“‘You will now come to the Thrinacian island, and here you will seemany herds of cattle and flocks of sheep belonging to the sun-god—sevenherds of cattle and seven flocks of sheep, with fifty head in eachflock. They do not breed, nor do they become fewer in number, and theyare tended by the goddesses Phaethusa and Lampetie, who are children ofthe sun-god Hyperion by Neaera. Their mother when she had borne themand had done suckling them sent them to the Thrinacian island, whichwas a long way off, to live there and look after their father’s flocksand herds. If you leave these flocks unharmed, and think of nothing butgetting home, you may yet after much hardship reach Ithaca; but if youharm them, then I forewarn you of the destruction both of your ship andof your comrades; and even though you may yourself escape, you willreturn late, in bad plight, after losing all your men.’“Here she ended, and dawn enthroned in gold began to show in heaven,whereon she returned inland. I then went on board and told my men toloose the ship from her moorings; so they at once got into her, tooktheir places, and began to smite the grey sea with their oars.Presently the great and cunning goddess Circe befriended us with a fairwind that blew dead aft, and staid steadily with us, keeping our sailswell filled, so we did whatever wanted doing to the ship’s gear, andlet her go as wind and helmsman headed her.“Then, being much troubled in mind, I said to my men, ‘My friends, itis not right that one or two of us alone should know the propheciesthat Circe has made me, I will therefore tell you about them, so thatwhether we live or die we may do so with our eyes open. First she saidwe were to keep clear of the Sirens, who sit and sing most beautifullyin a field of flowers; but she said I might hear them myself so long asno one else did. Therefore, take me and bind me to the crosspiece halfway up the mast; bind me as I stand upright, with a bond so fast that Icannot possibly break away, and lash the rope’s ends to the mastitself. If I beg and pray you to set me free, then bind me more tightlystill.’“I had hardly finished telling everything to the men before we reachedthe island of the two Sirens,102 for the wind had been very favourable.Then all of a sudden it fell dead calm; there was not a breath of windnor a ripple upon the water, so the men furled the sails and stowedthem; then taking to their oars they whitened the water with the foamthey raised in rowing. Meanwhile I look a large wheel of wax and cut itup small with my sword. Then I kneaded the wax in my strong hands tillit became soft, which it soon did between the kneading and the rays ofthe sun-god son of Hyperion. Then I stopped the ears of all my men, andthey bound me hands and feet to the mast as I stood upright on thecross piece; but they went on rowing themselves. When we had got withinearshot of the land, and the ship was going at a good rate, the Sirenssaw that we were getting in shore and began with their singing.“‘Come here,’ they sang, ‘renowned Ulysses, honour to the Achaean name,and listen to our two voices. No one ever sailed past us withoutstaying to hear the enchanting sweetness of our song—and he who listenswill go on his way not only charmed, but wiser, for we know all theills that the gods laid upon the Argives and Trojans before Troy, andcan tell you everything that is going to happen over the whole world.’“They sang these words most musically, and as I longed to hear themfurther I made signs by frowning to my men that they should set mefree; but they quickened their stroke, and Eurylochus and Perimedesbound me with still stronger bonds till we had got out of hearing ofthe Sirens’ voices. Then my men took the wax from their ears andunbound me.“Immediately after we had got past the island I saw a great wave fromwhich spray was rising, and I heard a loud roaring sound. The men wereso frightened that they loosed hold of their oars, for the whole searesounded with the rushing of the waters,103 but the ship stayed whereit was, for the men had left off rowing. I went round, therefore, andexhorted them man by man not to lose heart.“‘My friends,’ said I, ‘this is not the first time that we have been indanger, and we are in nothing like so bad a case as when the Cyclopsshut us up in his cave; nevertheless, my courage and wise counsel savedus then, and we shall live to look back on all this as well. Now,therefore, let us all do as I say, trust in Jove and row on with mightand main. As for you, coxswain, these are your orders; attend to them,for the ship is in your hands; turn her head away from these steamingrapids and hug the rock, or she will give you the slip and be overyonder before you know where you are, and you will be the death of us.’“So they did as I told them; but I said nothing about the awful monsterScylla, for I knew the men would not go on rowing if I did, but wouldhuddle together in the hold. In one thing only did I disobey Circe’sstrict instructions—I put on my armour. Then seizing two strong spearsI took my stand on the ship’s bows, for it was there that I expectedfirst to see the monster of the rock, who was to do my men so muchharm; but I could not make her out anywhere, though I strained my eyeswith looking the gloomy rock all over and over.“Then we entered the Straits in great fear of mind, for on the one handwas Scylla, and on the other dread Charybdis kept sucking up the saltwater. As she vomited it up, it was like the water in a cauldron whenit is boiling over upon a great fire, and the spray reached the top ofthe rocks on either side. When she began to suck again, we could seethe water all inside whirling round and round, and it made a deafeningsound as it broke against the rocks. We could see the bottom of thewhirlpool all black with sand and mud, and the men were at their witsends for fear. While we were taken up with this, and were expectingeach moment to be our last, Scylla pounced down suddenly upon us andsnatched up my six best men. I was looking at once after both ship andmen, and in a moment I saw their hands and feet ever so high above me,struggling in the air as Scylla was carrying them off, and I heard themcall out my name in one last despairing cry. As a fisherman, seated,spear in hand, upon some jutting rock104 throws bait into the water todeceive the poor little fishes, and spears them with the ox’s horn withwhich his spear is shod, throwing them gasping on to the land as hecatches them one by one—even so did Scylla land these panting creatureson her rock and munch them up at the mouth of her den, while theyscreamed and stretched out their hands to me in their mortal agony.This was the most sickening sight that I saw throughout all my voyages.“When we had passed the [Wandering] rocks, with Scylla and terribleCharybdis, we reached the noble island of the sun-god, where were thegoodly cattle and sheep belonging to the sun Hyperion. While still atsea in my ship I could bear the cattle lowing as they came home to theyards, and the sheep bleating. Then I remembered what the blind Thebanprophet Teiresias had told me, and how carefully Aeaean Circe hadwarned me to shun the island of the blessed sun-god. So being muchtroubled I said to the men, ‘My men, I know you are hard pressed, butlisten while I tell you the prophecy that Teiresias made me, and howcarefully Aeaean Circe warned me to shun the island of the blessedsun-god, for it was here, she said, that our worst danger would lie.Head the ship, therefore, away from the island.’“The men were in despair at this, and Eurylochus at once gave me aninsolent answer. ‘Ulysses,’ said he, ‘you are cruel; you are verystrong yourself and never get worn out; you seem to be made of iron,and now, though your men are exhausted with toil and want of sleep, youwill not let them land and cook themselves a good supper upon thisisland, but bid them put out to sea and go faring fruitlessly onthrough the watches of the flying night. It is by night that the windsblow hardest and do so much damage; how can we escape should one ofthose sudden squalls spring up from South West or West, which so oftenwreck a vessel when our lords the gods are unpropitious? Now,therefore, let us obey the behests of night and prepare our supper herehard by the ship; to-morrow morning we will go on board again and putout to sea.’“Thus spoke Eurylochus, and the men approved his words. I saw thatheaven meant us a mischief and said, ‘You force me to yield, for youare many against one, but at any rate each one of you must take hissolemn oath that if he meet with a herd of cattle or a large flock ofsheep, he will not be so mad as to kill a single head of either, butwill be satisfied with the food that Circe has given us.’“They all swore as I bade them, and when they had completed their oathwe made the ship fast in a harbour that was near a stream of freshwater, and the men went ashore and cooked their suppers. As soon asthey had had enough to eat and drink, they began talking about theirpoor comrades whom Scylla had snatched up and eaten; this set themweeping and they went on crying till they fell off into a sound sleep.“In the third watch of the night when the stars had shifted theirplaces, Jove raised a great gale of wind that flew a hurricane so thatland and sea were covered with thick clouds, and night sprang forth outof the heavens. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn,appeared, we brought the ship to land and drew her into a cave whereinthe sea-nymphs hold their courts and dances, and I called the mentogether in council.“‘My friends,’ said I, ‘we have meat and drink in the ship, let usmind, therefore, and not touch the cattle, or we shall suffer for it;for these cattle and sheep belong to the mighty sun, who sees and givesear to everything.’ And again they promised that they would obey.“For a whole month the wind blew steadily from the South, and there wasno other wind, but only South and East.105 As long as corn and wineheld out the men did not touch the cattle when they were hungry; when,however, they had eaten all there was in the ship, they were forced togo further afield, with hook and line, catching birds, and takingwhatever they could lay their hands on; for they were starving. Oneday, therefore, I went up inland that I might pray heaven to show mesome means of getting away. When I had gone far enough to be clear ofall my men, and had found a place that was well sheltered from thewind, I washed my hands and prayed to all the gods in Olympus till byand by they sent me off into a sweet sleep.“Meanwhile Eurylochus had been giving evil counsel to the men, ‘Listento me,’ said he, ‘my poor comrades. All deaths are bad enough but thereis none so bad as famine. Why should not we drive in the best of thesecows and offer them in sacrifice to the immortal gods? If we ever getback to Ithaca, we can build a fine temple to the sun-god and enrich itwith every kind of ornament; if, however, he is determined to sink ourship out of revenge for these homed cattle, and the other gods are ofthe same mind, I for one would rather drink salt water once for all andhave done with it, than be starved to death by inches in such a desertisland as this is.’“Thus spoke Eurylochus, and the men approved his words. Now the cattle,so fair and goodly, were feeding not far from the ship; the men,therefore, drove in the best of them, and they all stood round themsaying their prayers, and using young oak-shoots instead ofbarley-meal, for there was no barley left. When they had done prayingthey killed the cows and dressed their carcasses; they cut out thethigh bones, wrapped them round in two layers of fat, and set somepieces of raw meat on top of them. They had no wine with which to makedrink-offerings over the sacrifice while it was cooking, so they keptpouring on a little water from time to time while the inward meats werebeing grilled; then, when the thigh bones were burned and they hadtasted the inward meats, they cut the rest up small and put the piecesupon the spits.“By this time my deep sleep had left me, and I turned back to the shipand to the sea shore. As I drew near I began to smell hot roast meat,so I groaned out a prayer to the immortal gods. ‘Father Jove,’ Iexclaimed, ‘and all you other gods who live in everlasting bliss, youhave done me a cruel mischief by the sleep into which you have sent me;see what fine work these men of mine have been making in my absence.’“Meanwhile Lampetie went straight off to the sun and told him we hadbeen killing his cows, whereon he flew into a great rage, and said tothe immortals, ‘Father Jove, and all you other gods who live ineverlasting bliss, I must have vengeance on the crew of Ulysses’ ship:they have had the insolence to kill my cows, which were the one thing Iloved to look upon, whether I was going up heaven or down again. Ifthey do not square accounts with me about my cows, I will go down toHades and shine there among the dead.’“‘Sun,’ said Jove, ‘go on shining upon us gods and upon mankind overthe fruitful earth. I will shiver their ship into little pieces with abolt of white lightning as soon as they get out to sea.’“I was told all this by Calypso, who said she had heard it from themouth of Mercury.“As soon as I got down to my ship and to the sea shore I rebuked eachone of the men separately, but we could see no way out of it, for thecows were dead already. And indeed the gods began at once to show signsand wonders among us, for the hides of the cattle crawled about, andthe joints upon the spits began to low like cows, and the meat, whethercooked or raw, kept on making a noise just as cows do.“For six days my men kept driving in the best cows and feasting uponthem, but when Jove the son of Saturn had added a seventh day, the furyof the gale abated; we therefore went on board, raised our masts,spread sail, and put out to sea. As soon as we were well away from theisland, and could see nothing but sky and sea, the son of Saturn raiseda black cloud over our ship, and the sea grew dark beneath it. We didnot get on much further, for in another moment we were caught by aterrific squall from the West that snapped the forestays of the mast sothat it fell aft, while all the ship’s gear tumbled about at the bottomof the vessel. The mast fell upon the head of the helmsman in theship’s stern, so that the bones of his head were crushed to pieces, andhe fell overboard as though he were diving, with no more life left inhim.“Then Jove let fly with his thunderbolts, and the ship went round andround, and was filled with fire and brimstone as the lightning struckit. The men all fell into the sea; they were carried about in the waterround the ship, looking like so many sea-gulls, but the god presentlydeprived them of all chance of getting home again.“I stuck to the ship till the sea knocked her sides from her keel(which drifted about by itself) and struck the mast out of her in thedirection of the keel; but there was a backstay of stout ox-thong stillhanging about it, and with this I lashed the mast and keel together,and getting astride of them was carried wherever the winds chose totake me.“[The gale from the West had now spent its force, and the wind got intothe South again, which frightened me lest I should be taken back to theterrible whirlpool of Charybdis. This indeed was what actuallyhappened, for I was borne along by the waves all night, and by sunrisehad reached the rock of Scylla, and the whirlpool. She was then suckingdown the salt sea water,106 but I was carried aloft toward the figtree, which I caught hold of and clung on to like a bat. I could notplant my feet anywhere so as to stand securely, for the roots were along way off and the boughs that overshadowed the whole pool were toohigh, too vast, and too far apart for me to reach them; so I hungpatiently on, waiting till the pool should discharge my mast and raftagain—and a very long while it seemed. A jury-man is not more glad toget home to supper, after having been long detained in court bytroublesome cases, than I was to see my raft beginning to work its wayout of the whirlpool again. At last I let go with my hands and feet,and fell heavily into the sea, hard by my raft on to which I then got,and began to row with my hands. As for Scylla, the father of gods andmen would not let her get further sight of me—otherwise I should havecertainly been lost.107“Hence I was carried along for nine days till on the tenth night thegods stranded me on the Ogygian island, where dwells the great andpowerful goddess Calypso. She took me in and was kind to me, but I needsay no more about this, for I told you and your noble wife all about ityesterday, and I hate saying the same thing over and over again.”BOOK XIIIULYSSES LEAVES SCHERIA AND RETURNS TO ITHACA.Thus did he speak, and they all held their peace throughout the coveredcloister, enthralled by the charm of his story, till presently Alcinousbegan to speak.“Ulysses,” said he, “now that you have reached my house I doubt not youwill get home without further misadventure no matter how much you havesuffered in the past. To you others, however, who come here night afternight to drink my choicest wine and listen to my bard, I would insistas follows. Our guest has already packed up the clothes, wroughtgold,108 and other valuables which you have brought for his acceptance;let us now, therefore, present him further, each one of us, with alarge tripod and a cauldron. We will recoup ourselves by the levy of ageneral rate; for private individuals cannot be expected to bear theburden of such a handsome present.”Every one approved of this, and then they went home to bed each in hisown abode. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared theyhurried down to the ship and brought their cauldrons with them.Alcinous went on board and saw everything so securely stowed under theship’s benches that nothing could break adrift and injure the rowers.Then they went to the house of Alcinous to get dinner, and hesacrificed a bull for them in honour of Jove who is the lord of all.They set the steaks to grill and made an excellent dinner, after whichthe inspired bard, Demodocus, who was a favourite with every one, sangto them; but Ulysses kept on turning his eyes towards the sun, asthough to hasten his setting, for he was longing to be on his way. Asone who has been all day ploughing a fallow field with a couple of oxenkeeps thinking about his supper and is glad when night comes that hemay go and get it, for it is all his legs can do to carry him, even sodid Ulysses rejoice when the sun went down, and he at once said to thePhaeacians, addressing himself more particularly to King Alcinous:“Sir, and all of you, farewell. Make your drink-offerings and send meon my way rejoicing, for you have fulfilled my heart’s desire by givingme an escort, and making me presents, which heaven grant that I mayturn to good account; may I find my admirable wife living in peaceamong friends,109 and may you whom I leave behind me give satisfactionto your wives and children;110 may heaven vouchsafe you every goodgrace, and may no evil thing come among your people.”Thus did he speak. His hearers all of them approved his saying andagreed that he should have his escort inasmuch as he had spokenreasonably. Alcinous therefore said to his servant, “Pontonous, mixsome wine and hand it round to everybody, that we may offer a prayer tofather Jove, and speed our guest upon his way.”Pontonous mixed the wine and handed it to every one in turn; the otherseach from his own seat made a drink-offering to the blessed gods thatlive in heaven, but Ulysses rose and placed the double cup in the handsof queen Arete.“Farewell, queen,” said he, “henceforward and for ever, till age anddeath, the common lot of mankind, lay their hands upon you. I now takemy leave; be happy in this house with your children, your people, andwith king Alcinous.”As he spoke he crossed the threshold, and Alcinous sent a man toconduct him to his ship and to the sea shore. Arete also sent somemaidservants with him—one with a clean shirt and cloak, another tocarry his strong box, and a third with corn and wine. When they got tothe water side the crew took these things and put them on board, withall the meat and drink; but for Ulysses they spread a rug and a linensheet on deck that he might sleep soundly in the stern of the ship.Then he too went on board and lay down without a word, but the crewtook every man his place and loosed the hawser from the pierced stoneto which it had been bound. Thereon, when they began rowing out to sea,Ulysses fell into a deep, sweet, and almost deathlike slumber.111The ship bounded forward on her way as a four in hand chariot fliesover the course when the horses feel the whip. Her prow curvetted as itwere the neck of a stallion, and a great wave of dark blue waterseethed in her wake. She held steadily on her course, and even afalcon, swiftest of all birds, could not have kept pace with her. Thus,then, she cut her way through the water, carrying one who was ascunning as the gods, but who was now sleeping peacefully, forgetful ofall that he had suffered both on the field of battle and by the wavesof the weary sea.When the bright star that heralds the approach of dawn began to show,the ship drew near to land.112 Now there is in Ithaca a haven of theold merman Phorcys, which lies between two points that break the lineof the sea and shut the harbour in. These shelter it from the storms ofwind and sea that rage outside, so that, when once within it, a shipmay lie without being even moored. At the head of this harbour there isa large olive tree, and at no great distance a fine overarching cavernsacred to the nymphs who are called Naiads.113 There are mixing bowlswithin it and wine-jars of stone, and the bees hive there. Moreover,there are great looms of stone on which the nymphs weave their robes ofsea purple—very curious to see—and at all times there is water withinit. It has two entrances, one facing North by which mortals can go downinto the cave, while the other comes from the South and is moremysterious; mortals cannot possibly get in by it, it is the way takenby the gods.Into this harbour, then, they took their ship, for they knew theplace.114 She had so much way upon her that she ran half her own lengthon to the shore;115 when, however, they had landed, the first thingthey did was to lift Ulysses with his rug and linen sheet out of theship, and lay him down upon the sand still fast asleep. Then they tookout the presents which Minerva had persuaded the Phaeacians to give himwhen he was setting out on his voyage homewards. They put these alltogether by the root of the olive tree, away from the road, for fearsome passer by116 might come and steal them before Ulysses awoke; andthen they made the best of their way home again.But Neptune did not forget the threats with which he had alreadythreatened Ulysses, so he took counsel with Jove. “Father Jove,” saidhe, “I shall no longer be held in any sort of respect among you gods,if mortals like the Phaeacians, who are my own flesh and blood, showsuch small regard for me. I said I would let Ulysses get home when hehad suffered sufficiently. I did not say that he should never get homeat all, for I knew you had already nodded your head about it, andpromised that he should do so; but now they have brought him in a shipfast asleep and have landed him in Ithaca after loading him with moremagnificent presents of bronze, gold, and raiment than he would everhave brought back from Troy, if he had had his share of the spoil andgot home without misadventure.”And Jove answered, “What, O Lord of the Earthquake, are you talkingabout? The gods are by no means wanting in respect for you. It would bemonstrous were they to insult one so old and honoured as you are. Asregards mortals, however, if any of them is indulging in insolence andtreating you disrespectfully, it will always rest with yourself to dealwith him as you may think proper, so do just as you please.”“I should have done so at once,” replied Neptune, “if I were notanxious to avoid anything that might displease you; now, therefore, Ishould like to wreck the Phaeacian ship as it is returning from itsescort. This will stop them from escorting people in future; and Ishould also like to bury their city under a huge mountain.”“My good friend,” answered Jove, “I should recommend you at the verymoment when the people from the city are watching the ship on her way,to turn it into a rock near the land and looking like a ship. This willastonish everybody, and you can then bury their city under themountain.”When earth-encircling Neptune heard this he went to Scheria where thePhaeacians live, and stayed there till the ship, which was making rapidway, had got close in. Then he went up to it, turned it into stone, anddrove it down with the flat of his hand so as to root it in the ground.After this he went away.The Phaeacians then began talking among themselves, and one would turntowards his neighbour, saying, “Bless my heart, who is it that can haverooted the ship in the sea just as she was getting into port? We couldsee the whole of her only a moment ago.”This was how they talked, but they knew nothing about it; and Alcinoussaid, “I remember now the old prophecy of my father. He said thatNeptune would be angry with us for taking every one so safely over thesea, and would one day wreck a Phaeacian ship as it was returning froman escort, and bury our city under a high mountain. This was what myold father used to say, and now it is all coming true.117 Now thereforelet us all do as I say; in the first place we must leave off givingpeople escorts when they come here, and in the next let us sacrificetwelve picked bulls to Neptune that he may have mercy upon us, and notbury our city under the high mountain.” When the people heard this theywere afraid and got ready the bulls.Thus did the chiefs and rulers of the Phaeacians pray to king Neptune,standing round his altar; and at the same time118 Ulysses woke up oncemore upon his own soil. He had been so long away that he did not knowit again; moreover, Jove’s daughter Minerva had made it a foggy day, sothat people might not know of his having come, and that she might tellhim everything without either his wife or his fellow citizens andfriends recognising him119 until he had taken his revenge upon thewicked suitors. Everything, therefore, seemed quite different tohim—the long straight tracks, the harbours, the precipices, and thegoodly trees, appeared all changed as he started up and looked upon hisnative land. So he smote his thighs with the flat of his hands andcried aloud despairingly.“Alas,” he exclaimed, “among what manner of people am I fallen? Arethey savage and uncivilised or hospitable and humane? Where shall I putall this treasure, and which way shall I go? I wish I had staid overthere with the Phaeacians; or I could have gone to some other greatchief who would have been good to me and given me an escort. As it is Ido not know where to put my treasure, and I cannot leave it here forfear somebody else should get hold of it. In good truth the chiefs andrulers of the Phaeacians have not been dealing fairly by me, and haveleft me in the wrong country; they said they would take me back toIthaca and they have not done so: may Jove the protector of suppliantschastise them, for he watches over everybody and punishes those who dowrong. Still, I suppose I must count my goods and see if the crew havegone off with any of them.”He counted his goodly coppers and cauldrons, his gold and all hisclothes, but there was nothing missing; still he kept grieving aboutnot being in his own country, and wandered up and down by the shore ofthe sounding sea bewailing his hard fate. Then Minerva came up to himdisguised as a young shepherd of delicate and princely mien, with agood cloak folded double about her shoulders; she had sandals on hercomely feet and held a javelin in her hand. Ulysses was glad when hesaw her, and went straight up to her.“My friend,” said he, “you are the first person whom I have met with inthis country; I salute you, therefore, and beg you to be well disposedtowards me. Protect these my goods, and myself too, for I embrace yourknees and pray to you as though you were a god. Tell me, then, and tellme truly, what land and country is this? Who are its inhabitants? Am Ion an island, or is this the sea board of some continent?”Minerva answered, “Stranger, you must be very simple, or must have comefrom somewhere a long way off, not to know what country this is. It isa very celebrated place, and everybody knows it East and West. It isrugged and not a good driving country, but it is by no means a badisland for what there is of it. It grows any quantity of corn and alsowine, for it is watered both by rain and dew; it breeds cattle also andgoats; all kinds of timber grow here, and there are watering placeswhere the water never runs dry; so, sir, the name of Ithaca is knowneven as far as Troy, which I understand to be a long way off from thisAchaean country.”Ulysses was glad at finding himself, as Minerva told him, in his owncountry, and he began to answer, but he did not speak the truth, andmade up a lying story in the instinctive wiliness of his heart.“I heard of Ithaca,” said he, “when I was in Crete beyond the seas, andnow it seems I have reached it with all these treasures. I have left asmuch more behind me for my children, but am flying because I killedOrsilochus son of Idomeneus, the fleetest runner in Crete. I killed himbecause he wanted to rob me of the spoils I had got from Troy with somuch trouble and danger both on the field of battle and by the waves ofthe weary sea; he said I had not served his father loyally at Troy asvassal, but had set myself up as an independent ruler, so I lay in waitfor him with one of my followers by the road side, and speared him ashe was coming into town from the country. It was a very dark night andnobody saw us; it was not known, therefore, that I had killed him, butas soon as I had done so I went to a ship and besought the owners, whowere Phoenicians, to take me on board and set me in Pylos or in Eliswhere the Epeans rule, giving them as much spoil as satisfied them.They meant no guile, but the wind drove them off their course, and wesailed on till we came hither by night. It was all we could do to getinside the harbour, and none of us said a word about supper though wewanted it badly, but we all went on shore and lay down just as we were.I was very tired and fell asleep directly, so they took my goods out ofthe ship, and placed them beside me where I was lying upon the sand.Then they sailed away to Sidonia, and I was left here in great distressof mind.”Such was his story, but Minerva smiled and caressed him with her hand.Then she took the form of a woman, fair, stately, and wise, “He must beindeed a shifty lying fellow,” said she, “who could surpass you in allmanner of craft even though you had a god for your antagonist. Daredevil that you are, full of guile, unwearying in deceit, can you notdrop your tricks and your instinctive falsehood, even now that you arein your own country again? We will say no more, however, about this,for we can both of us deceive upon occasion—you are the mostaccomplished counsellor and orator among all mankind, while I fordiplomacy and subtlety have no equal among the gods. Did you not knowJove’s daughter Minerva—me, who have been ever with you, who kept watchover you in all your troubles, and who made the Phaeacians take sogreat a liking to you? And now, again, I am come here to talk thingsover with you, and help you to hide the treasure I made the Phaeaciansgive you; I want to tell you about the troubles that await you in yourown house; you have got to face them, but tell no one, neither man norwoman, that you have come home again. Bear everything, and put up withevery man’s insolence, without a word.”And Ulysses answered, “A man, goddess, may know a great deal, but youare so constantly changing your appearance that when he meets you it isa hard matter for him to know whether it is you or not. This much,however, I know exceedingly well; you were very kind to me as long aswe Achaeans were fighting before Troy, but from the day on which wewent on board ship after having sacked the city of Priam, and heavendispersed us—from that day, Minerva, I saw no more of you, and cannotever remember your coming to my ship to help me in a difficulty; I hadto wander on sick and sorry till the gods delivered me from evil and Ireached the city of the Phaeacians, where you encouraged me and took meinto the town.120 And now, I beseech you in your father’s name, tell methe truth, for I do not believe I am really back in Ithaca. I am insome other country and you are mocking me and deceiving me in all youhave been saying. Tell me then truly, have I really got back to my owncountry?”“You are always taking something of that sort in your head,” repliedMinerva, “and that is why I cannot desert you in your afflictions; youare so plausible, shrewd and shifty. Any one but yourself on returningfrom so long a voyage would at once have gone home to see his wife andchildren, but you do not seem to care about asking after them orhearing any news about them till you have exploited your wife, whoremains at home vainly grieving for you, and having no peace night orday for the tears she sheds on your behalf. As for my not coming nearyou, I was never uneasy about you, for I was certain you would get backsafely though you would lose all your men, and I did not wish toquarrel with my uncle Neptune, who never forgave you for having blindedhis son.121 I will now, however, point out to you the lie of the land,and you will then perhaps believe me. This is the haven of the oldmerman Phorcys, and here is the olive tree that grows at the head ofit; [near it is the cave sacred to the Naiads;122 here too is theoverarching cavern in which you have offered many an acceptablehecatomb to the nymphs, and this is the wooded mountain Neritum.”As she spoke the goddess dispersed the mist and the land appeared. ThenUlysses rejoiced at finding himself again in his own land, and kissedthe bounteous soil; he lifted up his hands and prayed to the nymphs,saying, “Naiad nymphs, daughters of Jove, I made sure that I was neveragain to see you, now therefore I greet you with all lovingsalutations, and I will bring you offerings as in the old days, ifJove’s redoubtable daughter will grant me life, and bring my son tomanhood.”“Take heart, and do not trouble yourself about that,” rejoined Minerva,“let us rather set about stowing your things at once in the cave, wherethey will be quite safe. Let us see how we can best manage it all.”Therewith she went down into the cave to look for the safest hidingplaces, while Ulysses brought up all the treasure of gold, bronze, andgood clothing which the Phaeacians had given him. They stowedeverything carefully away, and Minerva set a stone against the door ofthe cave. Then the two sat down by the root of the great olive, andconsulted how to compass the destruction of the wicked suitors.“Ulysses,” said Minerva, “noble son of Laertes, think how you can layhands on these disreputable people who have been lording it in yourhouse these three years, courting your wife and making wedding presentsto her, while she does nothing but lament your absence, giving hope andsending encouraging messages123 to every one of them, but meaning thevery opposite of all she says.”And Ulysses answered, “In good truth, goddess, it seems I should havecome to much the same bad end in my own house as Agamemnon did, if youhad not given me such timely information. Advise me how I shall bestavenge myself. Stand by my side and put your courage into my heart ason the day when we loosed Troy’s fair diadem from her brow. Help me nowas you did then, and I will fight three hundred men, if you, goddess,will be with me.”“Trust me for that,” said she, “I will not lose sight of you when oncewe set about it, and I imagine that some of those who are devouringyour substance will then bespatter the pavement with their blood andbrains. I will begin by disguising you so that no human being shallknow you; I will cover your body with wrinkles; you shall lose all youryellow hair; I will clothe you in a garment that shall fill all who seeit with loathing; I will blear your fine eyes for you, and make you anunseemly object in the sight of the suitors, of your wife, and of theson whom you left behind you. Then go at once to the swineherd who isin charge of your pigs; he has been always well affected towards you,and is devoted to Penelope and your son; you will find him feeding hispigs near the rock that is called Raven124 by the fountain Arethusa,where they are fattening on beechmast and spring water after theirmanner. Stay with him and find out how things are going, while Iproceed to Sparta and see your son, who is with Menelaus at Lacedaemon,where he has gone to try and find out whether you are still alive.”125“But why,” said Ulysses, “did you not tell him, for you knew all aboutit? Did you want him too to go sailing about amid all kinds of hardshipwhile others are eating up his estate?”Minerva answered, “Never mind about him, I sent him that he might bewell spoken of for having gone. He is in no sort of difficulty, but isstaying quite comfortably with Menelaus, and is surrounded withabundance of every kind. The suitors have put out to sea and are lyingin wait for him, for they mean to kill him before he can get home. I donot much think they will succeed, but rather that some of those who arenow eating up your estate will first find a grave themselves.”As she spoke Minerva touched him with her wand and covered him withwrinkles, took away all his yellow hair, and withered the flesh overhis whole body; she bleared his eyes, which were naturally very fineones; she changed his clothes and threw an old rag of a wrap about him,and a tunic, tattered, filthy, and begrimed with smoke; she also gavehim an undressed deer skin as an outer garment, and furnished him witha staff and a wallet all in holes, with a twisted thong for him tosling it over his shoulder.When the pair had thus laid their plans they parted, and the goddesswent straight to Lacedaemon to fetch Telemachus.BOOK XIVULYSSES IN THE HUT WITH EUMAEUS.Ulysses now left the haven, and took the rough track up through thewooded country and over the crest of the mountain till he reached theplace where Minerva had said that he would find the swineherd, who wasthe most thrifty servant he had. He found him sitting in front of hishut, which was by the yards that he had built on a site which could beseen from far. He had made them spacious126 and fair to see, with afree run for the pigs all round them; he had built them during hismaster’s absence, of stones which he had gathered out of the ground,without saying anything to Penelope or Laertes, and he had fenced themon top with thorn bushes. Outside the yard he had run a strong fence ofoaken posts, split, and set pretty close together, while inside he hadbuilt twelve styes near one another for the sows to lie in. There werefifty pigs wallowing in each stye, all of them breeding sows; but theboars slept outside and were much fewer in number, for the suitors kepton eating them, and the swineherd had to send them the best he hadcontinually. There were three hundred and sixty boar pigs, and theherdsman’s four hounds, which were as fierce as wolves, slept alwayswith them. The swineherd was at that moment cutting out a pair ofsandals127 from a good stout ox hide. Three of his men were out herdingthe pigs in one place or another, and he had sent the fourth to townwith a boar that he had been forced to send the suitors that they mightsacrifice it and have their fill of meat.When the hounds saw Ulysses they set up a furious barking and flew athim, but Ulysses was cunning enough to sit down and loose his hold ofthe stick that he had in his hand: still, he would have been torn bythem in his own homestead had not the swineherd dropped his ox hide,rushed full speed through the gate of the yard and driven the dogs offby shouting and throwing stones at them. Then he said to Ulysses, “Oldman, the dogs were likely to have made short work of you, and then youwould have got me into trouble. The gods have given me quite enoughworries without that, for I have lost the best of masters, and am incontinual grief on his account. I have to attend swine for other peopleto eat, while he, if he yet lives to see the light of day, is starvingin some distant land. But come inside, and when you have had your fillof bread and wine, tell me where you come from, and all about yourmisfortunes.”On this the swineherd led the way into the hut and bade him sit down.He strewed a good thick bed of rushes upon the floor, and on the top ofthis he threw the shaggy chamois skin—a great thick one—on which heused to sleep by night. Ulysses was pleased at being made thus welcome,and said “May Jove, sir, and the rest of the gods grant you yourheart’s desire in return for the kind way in which you have receivedme.”To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “Stranger, though a stillpoorer man should come here, it would not be right for me to insulthim, for all strangers and beggars are from Jove. You must take whatyou can get and be thankful, for servants live in fear when they haveyoung lords for their masters; and this is my misfortune now, forheaven has hindered the return of him who would have been always goodto me and given me something of my own—a house, a piece of land, a goodlooking wife, and all else that a liberal master allows a servant whohas worked hard for him, and whose labour the gods have prospered asthey have mine in the situation which I hold. If my master had grownold here he would have done great things by me, but he is gone, and Iwish that Helen’s whole race were utterly destroyed, for she has beenthe death of many a good man. It was this matter that took my master toIlius, the land of noble steeds, to fight the Trojans in the cause ofking Agamemnon.”As he spoke he bound his girdle round him and went to the styes wherethe young sucking pigs were penned. He picked out two which he broughtback with him and sacrificed. He singed them, cut them up, and spittedthem; when the meat was cooked he brought it all in and set it beforeUlysses, hot and still on the spit, whereon Ulysses sprinkled it overwith white barley meal. The swineherd then mixed wine in a bowl ofivy-wood, and taking a seat opposite Ulysses told him to begin.“Fall to, stranger,” said he, “on a dish of servant’s pork. The fatpigs have to go to the suitors, who eat them up without shame orscruple; but the blessed gods love not such shameful doings, andrespect those who do what is lawful and right. Even the fiercefreebooters who go raiding on other people’s land, and Jove gives themtheir spoil—even they, when they have filled their ships and got homeagain live conscience-stricken, and look fearfully for judgement; butsome god seems to have told these people that Ulysses is dead and gone;they will not, therefore, go back to their own homes and make theiroffers of marriage in the usual way, but waste his estate by force,without fear or stint. Not a day or night comes out of heaven, but theysacrifice not one victim nor two only, and they take the run of hiswine, for he was exceedingly rich. No other great man either in Ithacaor on the mainland is as rich as he was; he had as much as twenty menput together. I will tell you what he had. There are twelve herds ofcattle upon the main land, and as many flocks of sheep, there are alsotwelve droves of pigs, while his own men and hired strangers feed himtwelve widely spreading herds of goats. Here in Ithaca he runs evenlarge flocks of goats on the far end of the island, and they are in thecharge of excellent goat herds. Each one of these sends the suitors thebest goat in the flock every day. As for myself, I am in charge of thepigs that you see here, and I have to keep picking out the best I haveand sending it to them.”This was his story, but Ulysses went on eating and drinking ravenouslywithout a word, brooding his revenge. When he had eaten enough and wassatisfied, the swineherd took the bowl from which he usually drank,filled it with wine, and gave it to Ulysses, who was pleased, and saidas he took it in his hands, “My friend, who was this master of yoursthat bought you and paid for you, so rich and so powerful as you tellme? You say he perished in the cause of King Agamemnon; tell me who hewas, in case I may have met with such a person. Jove and the other godsknow, but I may be able to give you news of him, for I have travelledmuch.”Eumaeus answered, “Old man, no traveller who comes here with news willget Ulysses’ wife and son to believe his story. Nevertheless, tramps inwant of a lodging keep coming with their mouths full of lies, and not aword of truth; every one who finds his way to Ithaca goes to mymistress and tells her falsehoods, whereon she takes them in, makesmuch of them, and asks them all manner of questions, crying all thetime as women will when they have lost their husbands. And you too, oldman, for a shirt and a cloak would doubtless make up a very prettystory. But the wolves and birds of prey have long since torn Ulysses topieces, or the fishes of the sea have eaten him, and his bones arelying buried deep in sand upon some foreign shore; he is dead and gone,and a bad business it is for all his friends—for me especially; gowhere I may I shall never find so good a master, not even if I were togo home to my mother and father where I was bred and born. I do not somuch care, however, about my parents now, though I should dearly liketo see them again in my own country; it is the loss of Ulysses thatgrieves me most; I cannot speak of him without reverence though he ishere no longer, for he was very fond of me, and took such care of methat wherever he may be I shall always honour his memory.”“My friend,” replied Ulysses, “you are very positive, and very hard ofbelief about your master’s coming home again, nevertheless I will notmerely say, but will swear, that he is coming. Do not give me anythingfor my news till he has actually come, you may then give me a shirt andcloak of good wear if you will. I am in great want, but I will not takeanything at all till then, for I hate a man, even as I hate hell fire,who lets his poverty tempt him into lying. I swear by king Jove, by therites of hospitality, and by that hearth of Ulysses to which I have nowcome, that all will surely happen as I have said it will. Ulysses willreturn in this self same year; with the end of this moon and thebeginning of the next he will be here to do vengeance on all those whoare ill treating his wife and son.”To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “Old man, you will neitherget paid for bringing good news, nor will Ulysses ever come home; drinkyour wine in peace, and let us talk about something else. Do not keepon reminding me of all this; it always pains me when any one speaksabout my honoured master. As for your oath we will let it alone, but Ionly wish he may come, as do Penelope, his old father Laertes, and hisson Telemachus. I am terribly unhappy too about this same boy of his;he was running up fast into manhood, and bade fare to be no worse man,face and figure, than his father, but some one, either god or man, hasbeen unsettling his mind, so he has gone off to Pylos to try and getnews of his father, and the suitors are lying in wait for him as he iscoming home, in the hope of leaving the house of Arceisius without aname in Ithaca. But let us say no more about him, and leave him to betaken, or else to escape if the son of Saturn holds his hand over himto protect him. And now, old man, tell me your own story; tell me also,for I want to know, who you are and where you come from. Tell me ofyour town and parents, what manner of ship you came in, how crewbrought you to Ithaca, and from what country they professed to come—foryou cannot have come by land.”And Ulysses answered, “I will tell you all about it. If there were meatand wine enough, and we could stay here in the hut with nothing to dobut to eat and drink while the others go to their work, I could easilytalk on for a whole twelve months without ever finishing the story ofthe sorrows with which it has pleased heaven to visit me.“I am by birth a Cretan; my father was a well to do man, who had manysons born in marriage, whereas I was the son of a slave whom he hadpurchased for a concubine; nevertheless, my father Castor son of Hylax(whose lineage I claim, and who was held in the highest honour amongthe Cretans for his wealth, prosperity, and the valour of his sons) putme on the same level with my brothers who had been born in wedlock.When, however, death took him to the house of Hades, his sons dividedhis estate and cast lots for their shares, but to me they gave aholding and little else; nevertheless, my valour enabled me to marryinto a rich family, for I was not given to bragging, or shirking on thefield of battle. It is all over now; still, if you look at the strawyou can see what the ear was, for I have had trouble enough and tospare. Mars and Minerva made me doughty in war; when I had picked mymen to surprise the enemy with an ambuscade I never gave death so muchas a thought, but was the first to leap forward and spear all whom Icould overtake. Such was I in battle, but I did not care about farmwork, nor the frugal home life of those who would bring up children. Mydelight was in ships, fighting, javelins, and arrows—things that mostmen shudder to think of; but one man likes one thing and anotheranother, and this was what I was most naturally inclined to. Before theAchaeans went to Troy, nine times was I in command of men and ships onforeign service, and I amassed much wealth. I had my pick of the spoilin the first instance, and much more was allotted to me later on.“My house grew apace and I became a great man among the Cretans, butwhen Jove counselled that terrible expedition, in which so manyperished, the people required me and Idomeneus to lead their ships toTroy, and there was no way out of it, for they insisted on our doingso. There we fought for nine whole years, but in the tenth we sackedthe city of Priam and sailed home again as heaven dispersed us. Then itwas that Jove devised evil against me. I spent but one month happilywith my children, wife, and property, and then I conceived the idea ofmaking a descent on Egypt, so I fitted out a fine fleet and manned it.I had nine ships, and the people flocked to fill them. For six days Iand my men made feast, and I found them many victims both for sacrificeto the gods and for themselves, but on the seventh day we went on boardand set sail from Crete with a fair North wind behind us though we weregoing down a river. Nothing went ill with any of our ships, and we hadno sickness on board, but sat where we were and let the ships go as thewind and steersmen took them. On the fifth day we reached the riverAegyptus; there I stationed my ships in the river, bidding my men stayby them and keep guard over them while I sent out scouts to reconnoitrefrom every point of vantage.“But the men disobeyed my orders, took to their own devices, andravaged the land of the Egyptians, killing the men, and taking theirwives and children captive. The alarm was soon carried to the city, andwhen they heard the war cry, the people came out at daybreak till theplain was filled with horsemen and foot soldiers and with the gleam ofarmour. Then Jove spread panic among my men, and they would no longerface the enemy, for they found themselves surrounded. The Egyptianskilled many of us, and took the rest alive to do forced labour forthem. Jove, however, put it in my mind to do thus—and I wish I had diedthen and there in Egypt instead, for there was much sorrow in store forme—I took off my helmet and shield and dropped my spear from my hand;then I went straight up to the king’s chariot, clasped his knees andkissed them, whereon he spared my life, bade me get into his chariot,and took me weeping to his own home. Many made at me with their ashenspears and tried to kill me in their fury, but the king protected me,for he feared the wrath of Jove the protector of strangers, whopunishes those who do evil.“I stayed there for seven years and got together much money among theEgyptians, for they all gave me something; but when it was now going onfor eight years there came a certain Phoenician, a cunning rascal, whohad already committed all sorts of villainy, and this man talked meover into going with him to Phoenicia, where his house and hispossessions lay. I stayed there for a whole twelve months, but at theend of that time when months and days had gone by till the same seasonhad come round again, he set me on board a ship bound for Libya, on apretence that I was to take a cargo along with him to that place, butreally that he might sell me as a slave and take the money I fetched. Isuspected his intention, but went on board with him, for I could nothelp it.“The ship ran before a fresh North wind till we had reached the seathat lies between Crete and Libya; there, however, Jove counselledtheir destruction, for as soon as we were well out from Crete and couldsee nothing but sea and sky, he raised a black cloud over our ship andthe sea grew dark beneath it. Then Jove let fly with his thunderboltsand the ship went round and round and was filled with fire andbrimstone as the lightning struck it. The men fell all into the sea;they were carried about in the water round the ship looking like somany sea-gulls, but the god presently deprived them of all chance ofgetting home again. I was all dismayed. Jove, however, sent the ship’smast within my reach, which saved my life, for I clung to it, anddrifted before the fury of the gale. Nine days did I drift but in thedarkness of the tenth night a great wave bore me on to the Thesprotiancoast. There Pheidon king of the Thesprotians entertained me hospitablywithout charging me anything at all—for his son found me when I wasnearly dead with cold and fatigue, whereon he raised me by the hand,took me to his father’s house and gave me clothes to wear.“There it was that I heard news of Ulysses, for the king told me he hadentertained him, and shown him much hospitality while he was on hishomeward journey. He showed me also the treasure of gold, and wroughtiron that Ulysses had got together. There was enough to keep his familyfor ten generations, so much had he left in the house of king Pheidon.But the king said Ulysses had gone to Dodona that he might learn Jove’smind from the god’s high oak tree, and know whether after so long anabsence he should return to Ithaca openly, or in secret. Moreover theking swore in my presence, making drink-offerings in his own house ashe did so, that the ship was by the water side, and the crew found,that should take him to his own country. He sent me off however beforeUlysses returned, for there happened to be a Thesprotian ship sailingfor the wheat-growing island of Dulichium, and he told those in chargeof her to be sure and take me safely to King Acastus.“These men hatched a plot against me that would have reduced me to thevery extreme of misery, for when the ship had got some way out fromland they resolved on selling me as a slave. They stripped me of theshirt and cloak that I was wearing, and gave me instead the tatteredold clouts in which you now see me; then, towards nightfall, theyreached the tilled lands of Ithaca, and there they bound me with astrong rope fast in the ship, while they went on shore to get supper bythe sea side. But the gods soon undid my bonds for me, and having drawnmy rags over my head I slid down the rudder into the sea, where Istruck out and swam till I was well clear of them, and came ashore neara thick wood in which I lay concealed. They were very angry at myhaving escaped and went searching about for me, till at last theythought it was no further use and went back to their ship. The gods,having hidden me thus easily, then took me to a good man’s door—for itseems that I am not to die yet awhile.”To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “Poor unhappy stranger, Ihave found the story of your misfortunes extremely interesting, butthat part about Ulysses is not right; and you will never get me tobelieve it. Why should a man like you go about telling lies in thisway? I know all about the return of my master. The gods one and all ofthem detest him, or they would have taken him before Troy, or let himdie with friends around him when the days of his fighting were done;for then the Achaeans would have built a mound over his ashes and hisson would have been heir to his renown, but now the storm winds havespirited him away we know not whither.“As for me I live out of the way here with the pigs, and never go tothe town unless when Penelope sends for me on the arrival of some newsabout Ulysses. Then they all sit round and ask questions, both thosewho grieve over the king’s absence, and those who rejoice at it becausethey can eat up his property without paying for it. For my own part Ihave never cared about asking anyone else since the time when I wastaken in by an Aetolian, who had killed a man and come a long way tillat last he reached my station, and I was very kind to him. He said hehad seen Ulysses with Idomeneus among the Cretans, refitting his shipswhich had been damaged in a gale. He said Ulysses would return in thefollowing summer or autumn with his men, and that he would bring backmuch wealth. And now you, you unfortunate old man, since fate hasbrought you to my door, do not try to flatter me in this way with vainhopes. It is not for any such reason that I shall treat you kindly, butonly out of respect for Jove the god of hospitality, as fearing him andpitying you.”Ulysses answered, “I see that you are of an unbelieving mind; I havegiven you my oath, and yet you will not credit me; let us then make abargain, and call all the gods in heaven to witness it. If your mastercomes home, give me a cloak and shirt of good wear, and send me toDulichium where I want to go; but if he does not come as I say he will,set your men on to me, and tell them to throw me from yonder precipice,as a warning to tramps not to go about the country telling lies.”“And a pretty figure I should cut then,” replied Eumaeus, “both now andhereafter, if I were to kill you after receiving you into my hut andshowing you hospitality. I should have to say my prayers in goodearnest if I did; but it is just supper time and I hope my men willcome in directly, that we may cook something savoury for supper.”Thus did they converse, and presently the swineherds came up with thepigs, which were then shut up for the night in their styes, and atremendous squealing they made as they were being driven into them. ButEumaeus called to his men and said, “Bring in the best pig you have,that I may sacrifice him for this stranger, and we will take toll ofhim ourselves. We have had trouble enough this long time feeding pigs,while others reap the fruit of our labour.”On this he began chopping firewood, while the others brought in a finefat five year old boar pig, and set it at the altar. Eumaeus did notforget the gods, for he was a man of good principles, so the firstthing he did was to cut bristles from the pig’s face and throw theminto the fire, praying to all the gods as he did so that Ulysses mightreturn home again. Then he clubbed the pig with a billet of oak whichhe had kept back when he was chopping the firewood, and stunned it,while the others slaughtered and singed it. Then they cut it up, andEumaeus began by putting raw pieces from each joint on to some of thefat; these he sprinkled with barley meal, and laid upon the embers;they cut the rest of the meat up small, put the pieces upon the spitsand roasted them till they were done; when they had taken them off thespits they threw them on to the dresser in a heap. The swineherd, whowas a most equitable man, then stood up to give every one his share. Hemade seven portions; one of these he set apart for Mercury the son ofMaia and the nymphs, praying to them as he did so; the others he dealtout to the men man by man. He gave Ulysses some slices cut lengthwaysdown the loin as a mark of especial honour, and Ulysses was muchpleased. “I hope, Eumaeus,” said he, “that Jove will be as welldisposed towards you as I am, for the respect you are showing to anoutcast like myself.”To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “Eat, my good fellow, andenjoy your supper, such as it is. God grants this, and withholds that,just as he thinks right, for he can do whatever he chooses.”As he spoke he cut off the first piece and offered it as a burntsacrifice to the immortal gods; then he made them a drink-offering, putthe cup in the hands of Ulysses, and sat down to his own portion.Mesaulius brought them their bread; the swineherd had brought this manon his own account from among the Taphians during his master’s absence,and had paid for him with his own money without saying anything eitherto his mistress or Laertes. They then laid their hands upon the goodthings that were before them, and when they had had enough to eat anddrink, Mesaulius took away what was left of the bread, and they allwent to bed after having made a hearty supper.Now the night came on stormy and very dark, for there was no moon. Itpoured without ceasing, and the wind blew strong from the West, whichis a wet quarter, so Ulysses thought he would see whether Eumaeus, inthe excellent care he took of him, would take off his own cloak andgive it him, or make one of his men give him one. “Listen to me,” saidhe, “Eumaeus and the rest of you; when I have said a prayer I will tellyou something. It is the wine that makes me talk in this way; wine willmake even a wise man fall to singing; it will make him chuckle anddance and say many a word that he had better leave unspoken; still, asI have begun, I will go on. Would that I were still young and strong aswhen we got up an ambuscade before Troy. Menelaus and Ulysses were theleaders, but I was in command also, for the other two would have it so.When we had come up to the wall of the city we crouched down beneathour armour and lay there under cover of the reeds and thick brushwoodthat grew about the swamp. It came on to freeze with a North windblowing; the snow fell small and fine like hoar frost, and our shieldswere coated thick with rime. The others had all got cloaks and shirts,and slept comfortably enough with their shields about their shoulders,but I had carelessly left my cloak behind me, not thinking that Ishould be too cold, and had gone off in nothing but my shirt andshield. When the night was two-thirds through and the stars had shiftedtheir places, I nudged Ulysses who was close to me with my elbow, andhe at once gave me his ear.“‘Ulysses,’ said I, ‘this cold will be the death of me, for I have nocloak; some god fooled me into setting off with nothing on but myshirt, and I do not know what to do.’“Ulysses, who was as crafty as he was valiant, hit upon the followingplan:“‘Keep still,’ said he in a low voice, ‘or the others will hear you.’Then he raised his head on his elbow.“‘My friends,’ said he, ‘I have had a dream from heaven in my sleep. Weare a long way from the ships; I wish some one would go down and tellAgamemnon to send us up more men at once.’“On this Thoas son of Andraemon threw off his cloak and set out runningto the ships, whereon I took the cloak and lay in it comfortably enoughtill morning. Would that I were still young and strong as I was inthose days, for then some one of you swineherds would give me a cloakboth out of good will and for the respect due to a brave soldier; butnow people look down upon me because my clothes are shabby.”And Eumaeus answered, “Old man, you have told us an excellent story,and have said nothing so far but what is quite satisfactory; for thepresent, therefore, you shall want neither clothing nor anything elsethat a stranger in distress may reasonably expect, but to-morrowmorning you have to shake your own old rags about your body again, forwe have not many spare cloaks nor shirts up here, but every man hasonly one. When Ulysses’ son comes home again he will give you bothcloak and shirt, and send you wherever you may want to go.”With this he got up and made a bed for Ulysses by throwing somegoatskins and sheepskins on the ground in front of the fire. HereUlysses lay down, and Eumaeus covered him over with a great heavy cloakthat he kept for a change in case of extraordinarily bad weather.Thus did Ulysses sleep, and the young men slept beside him. But theswineherd did not like sleeping away from his pigs, so he got ready togo outside, and Ulysses was glad to see that he looked after hisproperty during his master’s absence. First he slung his sword over hisbrawny shoulders and put on a thick cloak to keep out the wind. He alsotook the skin of a large and well fed goat, and a javelin in case ofattack from men or dogs. Thus equipped he went to his rest where thepigs were camping under an overhanging rock that gave them shelter fromthe North wind.BOOK XVMINERVA SUMMONS TELEMACHUS FROM LACEDAEMON—HE MEETS WITH THEOCLYMENUSAT PYLOS AND BRINGS HIM TO ITHACA—ON LANDING HE GOES TO THE HUT OFEUMAEUS.But Minerva went to the fair city of Lacedaemon to tell Ulysses’ sonthat he was to return at once. She found him and Pisistratus sleepingin the forecourt of Menelaus’s house; Pisistratus was fast asleep, butTelemachus could get no rest all night for thinking of his unhappyfather, so Minerva went close up to him and said:“Telemachus, you should not remain so far away from home any longer,nor leave your property with such dangerous people in your house; theywill eat up everything you have among them, and you will have been on afool’s errand. Ask Menelaus to send you home at once if you wish tofind your excellent mother still there when you get back. Her fatherand brothers are already urging her to marry Eurymachus, who has givenher more than any of the others, and has been greatly increasing hiswedding presents. I hope nothing valuable may have been taken from thehouse in spite of you, but you know what women are—they always want todo the best they can for the man who marries them, and never giveanother thought to the children of their first husband, nor to theirfather either when he is dead and done with. Go home, therefore, andput everything in charge of the most respectable woman servant that youhave, until it shall please heaven to send you a wife of your own. Letme tell you also of another matter which you had better attend to. Thechief men among the suitors are lying in wait for you in the Strait128between Ithaca and Samos, and they mean to kill you before you canreach home. I do not much think they will succeed; it is more likelythat some of those who are now eating up your property will find agrave themselves. Sail night and day, and keep your ship well away fromthe islands; the god who watches over you and protects you will sendyou a fair wind. As soon as you get to Ithaca send your ship and men onto the town, but yourself go straight to the swineherd who has chargeof your pigs; he is well disposed towards you, stay with him,therefore, for the night, and then send him to Penelope to tell herthat you have got back safe from Pylos.”Then she went back to Olympus; but Telemachus stirred Pisistratus withhis heel to rouse him, and said, “Wake up Pisistratus, and yoke thehorses to the chariot, for we must set off home.”129But Pisistratus said, “No matter what hurry we are in we cannot drivein the dark. It will be morning soon; wait till Menelaus has broughthis presents and put them in the chariot for us; and let him say goodbye to us in the usual way. So long as he lives a guest should neverforget a host who has shown him kindness.”As he spoke day began to break, and Menelaus, who had already risen,leaving Helen in bed, came towards them. When Telemachus saw him he puton his shirt as fast as he could, threw a great cloak over hisshoulders, and went out to meet him. “Menelaus,” said he, “let me goback now to my own country, for I want to get home.”And Menelaus answered, “Telemachus, if you insist on going I will notdetain you. I do not like to see a host either too fond of his guest ortoo rude to him. Moderation is best in all things, and not letting aman go when he wants to do so is as bad as telling him to go if hewould like to stay. One should treat a guest well as long as he is inthe house and speed him when he wants to leave it. Wait, then, till Ican get your beautiful presents into your chariot, and till you haveyourself seen them. I will tell the women to prepare a sufficientdinner for you of what there may be in the house; it will be at oncemore proper and cheaper for you to get your dinner before setting outon such a long journey. If, moreover, you have a fancy for making atour in Hellas or in the Peloponnese, I will yoke my horses, and willconduct you myself through all our principal cities. No one will sendus away empty handed; every one will give us something—a bronze tripod,a couple of mules, or a gold cup.”“Menelaus,” replied Telemachus, “I want to go home at once, for when Icame away I left my property without protection, and fear that whilelooking for my father I shall come to ruin myself, or find thatsomething valuable has been stolen during my absence.”When Menelaus heard this he immediately told his wife and servants toprepare a sufficient dinner from what there might be in the house. Atthis moment Eteoneus joined him, for he lived close by and had just gotup; so Menelaus told him to light the fire and cook some meat, which heat once did. Then Menelaus went down into his fragrant store room,130not alone, but Helen went too, with Megapenthes. When he reached theplace where the treasures of his house were kept, he selected a doublecup, and told his son Megapenthes to bring also a silver mixing bowl.Meanwhile Helen went to the chest where she kept the lovely dresseswhich she had made with her own hands, and took out one that waslargest and most beautifully enriched with embroidery; it glitteredlike a star, and lay at the very bottom of the chest. 131 Then they allcame back through the house again till they got to Telemachus, andMenelaus said, “Telemachus, may Jove, the mighty husband of Juno, bringyou safely home according to your desire. I will now present you withthe finest and most precious piece of plate in all my house. It is amixing bowl of pure silver, except the rim, which is inlaid with gold,and it is the work of Vulcan. Phaedimus king of the Sidonians made me apresent of it in the course of a visit that I paid him while I was onmy return home. I should like to give it to you.”With these words he placed the double cup in the hands of Telemachus,while Megapenthes brought the beautiful mixing bowl and set it beforehim. Hard by stood lovely Helen with the robe ready in her hand.“I too, my son,” said she, “have something for you as a keepsake fromthe hand of Helen; it is for your bride to wear upon her wedding day.Till then, get your dear mother to keep it for you; thus may you goback rejoicing to your own country and to your home.”So saying she gave the robe over to him and he received it gladly. ThenPisistratus put the presents into the chariot, and admired them all ashe did so. Presently Menelaus took Telemachus and Pisistratus into thehouse, and they both of them sat down to table. A maid servant broughtthem water in a beautiful golden ewer, and poured it into a silverbasin for them to wash their hands, and she drew a clean table besidethem; an upper servant brought them bread and offered them many goodthings of what there was in the house. Eteoneus carved the meat andgave them each their portions, while Megapenthes poured out the wine.Then they laid their hands upon the good things that were before them,but as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink Telemachus andPisistratus yoked the horses, and took their places in the chariot.They drove out through the inner gateway and under the echoinggatehouse of the outer court, and Menelaus came after them with agolden goblet of wine in his right hand that they might make adrink-offering before they set out. He stood in front of the horses andpledged them, saying, “Farewell to both of you; see that you tellNestor how I have treated you, for he was as kind to me as any fathercould be while we Achaeans were fighting before Troy.”“We will be sure, sir,” answered Telemachus, “to tell him everything assoon as we see him. I wish I were as certain of finding Ulyssesreturned when I get back to Ithaca, that I might tell him of the verygreat kindness you have shown me and of the many beautiful presents Iam taking with me.”As he was thus speaking a bird flew on his right hand—an eagle with agreat white goose in its talons which it had carried off from the farmyard—and all the men and women were running after it and shouting. Itcame quite close up to them and flew away on their right hands in frontof the horses. When they saw it they were glad, and their hearts tookcomfort within them, whereon Pisistratus said, “Tell me, Menelaus, hasheaven sent this omen for us or for you?”Menelaus was thinking what would be the most proper answer for him tomake, but Helen was too quick for him and said, “I will read thismatter as heaven has put it in my heart, and as I doubt not that itwill come to pass. The eagle came from the mountain where it was bredand has its nest, and in like manner Ulysses, after having travelledfar and suffered much, will return to take his revenge—if indeed he isnot back already and hatching mischief for the suitors.”“May Jove so grant it,” replied Telemachus, “if it should prove to beso, I will make vows to you as though you were a god, even when I am athome.”As he spoke he lashed his horses and they started off at full speedthrough the town towards the open country. They swayed the yoke upontheir necks and travelled the whole day long till the sun set anddarkness was over all the land. Then they reached Pherae, where Diocleslived who was son of Ortilochus, the son of Alpheus. There they passedthe night and were treated hospitably. When the child of morning,rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, they again yoked their horses and theirplaces in the chariot. They drove out through the inner gateway andunder the echoing gatehouse of the outer court. Then Pisistratus lashedhis horses on and they flew forward nothing loath; ere long they cameto Pylos, and then Telemachus said:“Pisistratus, I hope you will promise to do what I am going to ask you.You know our fathers were old friends before us; moreover, we are bothof an age, and this journey has brought us together still more closely;do not, therefore, take me past my ship, but leave me there, for if Igo to your father’s house he will try to keep me in the warmth of hisgood will towards me, and I must go home at once.”Pisistratus thought how he should do as he was asked, and in the end hedeemed it best to turn his horses towards the ship, and put Menelaus’sbeautiful presents of gold and raiment in the stern of the vessel. Thenhe said, “Go on board at once and tell your men to do so also before Ican reach home to tell my father. I know how obstinate he is, and amsure he will not let you go; he will come down here to fetch you, andhe will not go back without you. But he will be very angry.”With this he drove his goodly steeds back to the city of the Pyliansand soon reached his home, but Telemachus called the men together andgave his orders. “Now, my men,” said he, “get everything in order onboard the ship, and let us set out home.”Thus did he speak, and they went on board even as he had said. But asTelemachus was thus busied, praying also and sacrificing to Minerva inthe ship’s stern, there came to him a man from a distant country, aseer, who was flying from Argos because he had killed a man. He wasdescended from Melampus, who used to live in Pylos, the land of sheep;he was rich and owned a great house, but he was driven into exile bythe great and powerful king Neleus. Neleus seized his goods and heldthem for a whole year, during which he was a close prisoner in thehouse of king Phylacus, and in much distress of mind both on account ofthe daughter of Neleus and because he was haunted by a great sorrowthat dread Erinys had laid upon him. In the end, however, he escapedwith his life, drove the cattle from Phylace to Pylos, avenged thewrong that had been done him, and gave the daughter of Neleus to hisbrother. Then he left the country and went to Argos, where it wasordained that he should reign over much people. There he married,established himself, and had two famous sons Antiphates and Mantius.Antiphates became father of Oicleus, and Oicleus of Amphiaraus, who wasdearly loved both by Jove and by Apollo, but he did not live to oldage, for he was killed in Thebes by reason of a woman’s gifts. His sonswere Alcmaeon and Amphilochus. Mantius, the other son of Melampus, wasfather to Polypheides and Cleitus. Aurora, throned in gold, carried offCleitus for his beauty’s sake, that he might dwell among the immortals,but Apollo made Polypheides the greatest seer in the whole world nowthat Amphiaraus was dead. He quarrelled with his father and went tolive in Hyperesia, where he remained and prophesied for all men.His son, Theoclymenus, it was who now came up to Telemachus as he wasmaking drink-offerings and praying in his ship. “Friend,” said he, “nowthat I find you sacrificing in this place, I beseech you by yoursacrifices themselves, and by the god to whom you make them, I pray youalso by your own head and by those of your followers tell me the truthand nothing but the truth. Who and whence are you? Tell me also of yourtown and parents.”Telemachus said, “I will answer you quite truly. I am from Ithaca, andmy father is Ulysses, as surely as that he ever lived. But he has cometo some miserable end. Therefore I have taken this ship and got my crewtogether to see if I can hear any news of him, for he has been away along time.”“I too,” answered Theoclymenus, “am an exile, for I have killed a manof my own race. He has many brothers and kinsmen in Argos, and theyhave great power among the Argives. I am flying to escape death attheir hands, and am thus doomed to be a wanderer on the face of theearth. I am your suppliant; take me, therefore, on board your ship thatthey may not kill me, for I know they are in pursuit.”“I will not refuse you,” replied Telemachus, “if you wish to join us.Come, therefore, and in Ithaca we will treat you hospitably accordingto what we have.”On this he received Theoclymenus’ spear and laid it down on the deck ofthe ship. He went on board and sat in the stern, bidding Theoclymenussit beside him; then the men let go the hawsers. Telemachus told themto catch hold of the ropes, and they made all haste to do so. They setthe mast in its socket in the cross plank, raised it and made it fastwith the forestays, and they hoisted their white sails with sheets oftwisted ox hide. Minerva sent them a fair wind that blew fresh andstrong to take the ship on her course as fast as possible. Thus thenthey passed by Crouni and Chalcis.Presently the sun set and darkness was over all the land. The vesselmade a quick passage to Pheae and thence on to Elis, where the Epeansrule. Telemachus then headed her for the flying islands,132 wonderingwithin himself whether he should escape death or should be takenprisoner.Meanwhile Ulysses and the swineherd were eating their supper in thehut, and the men supped with them. As soon as they had had to eat anddrink, Ulysses began trying to prove the swineherd and see whether hewould continue to treat him kindly, and ask him to stay on at thestation or pack him off to the city; so he said:“Eumaeus, and all of you, to-morrow I want to go away and begin beggingabout the town, so as to be no more trouble to you or to your men. Giveme your advice therefore, and let me have a good guide to go with meand show me the way. I will go the round of the city begging as I needsmust, to see if any one will give me a drink and a piece of bread. Ishould like also to go to the house of Ulysses and bring news of herhusband to Queen Penelope. I could then go about among the suitors andsee if out of all their abundance they will give me a dinner. I shouldsoon make them an excellent servant in all sorts of ways. Listen andbelieve when I tell you that by the blessing of Mercury who gives graceand good name to the works of all men, there is no one living who wouldmake a more handy servant than I should—to put fresh wood on the fire,chop fuel, carve, cook, pour out wine, and do all those services thatpoor men have to do for their betters.”The swineherd was very much disturbed when he heard this. “Heaven helpme,” he exclaimed, “what ever can have put such a notion as that intoyour head? If you go near the suitors you will be undone to acertainty, for their pride and insolence reach the very heavens. Theywould never think of taking a man like you for a servant. Theirservants are all young men, well dressed, wearing good cloaks andshirts, with well looking faces and their hair always tidy, the tablesare kept quite clean and are loaded with bread, meat, and wine. Staywhere you are, then; you are not in anybody’s way; I do not mind yourbeing here, no more do any of the others, and when Telemachus comeshome he will give you a shirt and cloak and will send you wherever youwant to go.”Ulysses answered, “I hope you may be as dear to the gods as you are tome, for having saved me from going about and getting into trouble;there is nothing worse than being always on the tramp; still, when menhave once got low down in the world they will go through a great dealon behalf of their miserable bellies. Since, however, you press me tostay here and await the return of Telemachus, tell me about Ulysses’mother, and his father whom he left on the threshold of old age when heset out for Troy. Are they still living or are they already dead and inthe house of Hades?”“I will tell you all about them,” replied Eumaeus, “Laertes is stillliving and prays heaven to let him depart peacefully in his own house,for he is terribly distressed about the absence of his son, and alsoabout the death of his wife, which grieved him greatly and aged himmore than anything else did. She came to an unhappy end133 throughsorrow for her son: may no friend or neighbour who has dealt kindly byme come to such an end as she did. As long as she was still living,though she was always grieving, I used to like seeing her and askingher how she did, for she brought me up along with her daughter Ctimene,the youngest of her children; we were boy and girl together, and shemade little difference between us. When, however, we both grew up, theysent Ctimene to Same and received a splendid dowry for her. As for me,my mistress gave me a good shirt and cloak with a pair of sandals formy feet, and sent me off into the country, but she was just as fond ofme as ever. This is all over now. Still it has pleased heaven toprosper my work in the situation which I now hold. I have enough to eatand drink, and can find something for any respectable stranger whocomes here; but there is no getting a kind word or deed out of mymistress, for the house has fallen into the hands of wicked people.Servants want sometimes to see their mistress and have a talk with her;they like to have something to eat and drink at the house, andsomething too to take back with them into the country. This is whatwill keep servants in a good humour.”Ulysses answered, “Then you must have been a very little fellow,Eumaeus, when you were taken so far away from your home and parents.Tell me, and tell me true, was the city in which your father and motherlived sacked and pillaged, or did some enemies carry you off when youwere alone tending sheep or cattle, ship you off here, and sell you forwhatever your master gave them?”“Stranger,” replied Eumaeus, “as regards your question: sit still, makeyourself comfortable, drink your wine, and listen to me. The nights arenow at their longest; there is plenty of time both for sleeping andsitting up talking together; you ought not to go to bed till bed time,too much sleep is as bad as too little; if any one of the others wishesto go to bed let him leave us and do so; he can then take my master’spigs out when he has done breakfast in the morning. We too will sithere eating and drinking in the hut, and telling one another storiesabout our misfortunes; for when a man has suffered much, and beenbuffeted about in the world, he takes pleasure in recalling the memoryof sorrows that have long gone by. As regards your question, then, mytale is as follows:“You may have heard of an island called Syra that lies over aboveOrtygia,134 where the land begins to turn round and look in anotherdirection.135 It is not very thickly peopled, but the soil is good,with much pasture fit for cattle and sheep, and it abounds with wineand wheat. Dearth never comes there, nor are the people plagued by anysickness, but when they grow old Apollo comes with Diana and kills themwith his painless shafts. It contains two communities, and the wholecountry is divided between these two. My father Ctesius son of Ormenus,a man comparable to the gods, reigned over both.“Now to this place there came some cunning traders from Phoenicia (forthe Phoenicians are great mariners) in a ship which they had freightedwith gewgaws of all kinds. There happened to be a Phoenician woman inmy father’s house, very tall and comely, and an excellent servant;these scoundrels got hold of her one day when she was washing neartheir ship, seduced her, and cajoled her in ways that no woman canresist, no matter how good she may be by nature. The man who hadseduced her asked her who she was and where she came from, and on thisshe told him her father’s name. ‘I come from Sidon,’ said she, ‘and amdaughter to Arybas, a man rolling in wealth. One day as I was cominginto the town from the country, some Taphian pirates seized me and tookme here over the sea, where they sold me to the man who owns thishouse, and he gave them their price for me.’“The man who had seduced her then said, ‘Would you like to come alongwith us to see the house of your parents and your parents themselves?They are both alive and are said to be well off.’“‘I will do so gladly,’ answered she, ‘if you men will first swear me asolemn oath that you will do me no harm by the way.’“They all swore as she told them, and when they had completed theiroath the woman said, ‘Hush; and if any of your men meets me in thestreet or at the well, do not let him speak to me, for fear some oneshould go and tell my master, in which case he would suspect something.He would put me in prison, and would have all of you murdered; keepyour own counsel therefore; buy your merchandise as fast as you can,and send me word when you have done loading. I will bring as much goldas I can lay my hands on, and there is something else also that I cando towards paying my fare. I am nurse to the son of the good man of thehouse, a funny little fellow just able to run about. I will carry himoff in your ship, and you will get a great deal of money for him if youtake him and sell him in foreign parts.’“On this she went back to the house. The Phoenicians stayed a wholeyear till they had loaded their ship with much precious merchandise,and then, when they had got freight enough, they sent to tell thewoman. Their messenger, a very cunning fellow, came to my father’shouse bringing a necklace of gold with amber beads strung among it; andwhile my mother and the servants had it in their hands admiring it andbargaining about it, he made a sign quietly to the woman and then wentback to the ship, whereon she took me by the hand and led me out of thehouse. In the fore part of the house she saw the tables set with thecups of guests who had been feasting with my father, as being inattendance on him; these were now all gone to a meeting of the publicassembly, so she snatched up three cups and carried them off in thebosom of her dress, while I followed her, for I knew no better. The sunwas now set, and darkness was over all the land, so we hurried on asfast as we could till we reached the harbour, where the Phoenician shipwas lying. When they had got on board they sailed their ways over thesea, taking us with them, and Jove sent then a fair wind; six days didwe sail both night and day, but on the seventh day Diana struck thewoman and she fell heavily down into the ship’s hold as though she werea sea gull alighting on the water; so they threw her overboard to theseals and fishes, and I was left all sorrowful and alone. Presently thewinds and waves took the ship to Ithaca, where Laertes gave sundry ofhis chattels for me, and thus it was that ever I came to set eyes uponthis country.”Ulysses answered, “Eumaeus, I have heard the story of your misfortuneswith the most lively interest and pity, but Jove has given you good aswell as evil, for in spite of everything you have a good master, whosees that you always have enough to eat and drink; and you lead a goodlife, whereas I am still going about begging my way from city to city.”Thus did they converse, and they had only a very little time left forsleep, for it was soon daybreak. In the mean time Telemachus and hiscrew were nearing land, so they loosed the sails, took down the mast,and rowed the ship into the harbour.136 They cast out their mooringstones and made fast the hawsers; they then got out upon the sea shore,mixed their wine, and got dinner ready. As soon as they had had enoughto eat and drink Telemachus said, “Take the ship on to the town, butleave me here, for I want to look after the herdsmen on one of myfarms. In the evening, when I have seen all I want, I will come down tothe city, and to-morrow morning in return for your trouble I will giveyou all a good dinner with meat and wine.” 137Then Theoclymenus said, “And what, my dear young friend, is to becomeof me? To whose house, among all your chief men, am I to repair? orshall I go straight to your own house and to your mother?”“At any other time,” replied Telemachus, “I should have bidden you goto my own house, for you would find no want of hospitality; at thepresent moment, however, you would not be comfortable there, for Ishall be away, and my mother will not see you; she does not often showherself even to the suitors, but sits at her loom weaving in an upperchamber, out of their way; but I can tell you a man whose house you cango to—I mean Eurymachus the son of Polybus, who is held in the highestestimation by every one in Ithaca. He is much the best man and the mostpersistent wooer, of all those who are paying court to my mother andtrying to take Ulysses’ place. Jove, however, in heaven alone knowswhether or no they will come to a bad end before the marriage takesplace.”As he was speaking a bird flew by upon his right hand—a hawk, Apollo’smessenger. It held a dove in its talons, and the feathers, as it torethem off,138 fell to the ground midway between Telemachus and the ship.On this Theoclymenus called him apart and caught him by the hand.“Telemachus,” said he, “that bird did not fly on your right handwithout having been sent there by some god. As soon as I saw it I knewit was an omen; it means that you will remain powerful and that therewill be no house in Ithaca more royal than your own.”“I wish it may prove so,” answered Telemachus. “If it does, I will showyou so much good will and give you so many presents that all who meetyou will congratulate you.”Then he said to his friend Piraeus, “Piraeus, son of Clytius, you havethroughout shown yourself the most willing to serve me of all those whohave accompanied me to Pylos; I wish you would take this stranger toyour own house and entertain him hospitably till I can come for him.”And Piraeus answered, “Telemachus, you may stay away as long as youplease, but I will look after him for you, and he shall find no lack ofhospitality.”As he spoke he went on board, and bade the others do so also and loosethe hawsers, so they took their places in the ship. But Telemachusbound on his sandals, and took a long and doughty spear with a head ofsharpened bronze from the deck of the ship. Then they loosed thehawsers, thrust the ship off from land, and made on towards the city asthey had been told to do, while Telemachus strode on as fast as hecould, till he reached the homestead where his countless herds of swinewere feeding, and where dwelt the excellent swineherd, who was sodevoted a servant to his master.BOOK XVIULYSSES REVEALS HIMSELF TO TELEMACHUS.Meanwhile Ulysses and the swineherd had lit a fire in the hut and werewere getting breakfast ready at daybreak, for they had sent the men outwith the pigs. When Telemachus came up, the dogs did not bark butfawned upon him, so Ulysses, hearing the sound of feet and noticingthat the dogs did not bark, said to Eumaeus:“Eumaeus, I hear footsteps; I suppose one of your men or some one ofyour acquaintance is coming here, for the dogs are fawning upon him andnot barking.”The words were hardly out of his mouth before his son stood at thedoor. Eumaeus sprang to his feet, and the bowls in which he was mixingwine fell from his hands, as he made towards his master. He kissed hishead and both his beautiful eyes, and wept for joy. A father could notbe more delighted at the return of an only son, the child of his oldage, after ten years’ absence in a foreign country and after havinggone through much hardship. He embraced him, kissed him all over asthough he had come back from the dead, and spoke fondly to him saying:“So you are come, Telemachus, light of my eyes that you are. When Iheard you had gone to Pylos I made sure I was never going to see youany more. Come in, my dear child, and sit down, that I may have a goodlook at you now you are home again; it is not very often you come intothe country to see us herdsmen; you stick pretty close to the towngenerally. I suppose you think it better to keep an eye on what thesuitors are doing.”“So be it, old friend,” answered Telemachus, “but I am come now becauseI want to see you, and to learn whether my mother is still at her oldhome or whether some one else has married her, so that the bed ofUlysses is without bedding and covered with cobwebs.”“She is still at the house,” replied Eumaeus, “grieving and breakingher heart, and doing nothing but weep, both night and day continually.”As he spoke he took Telemachus’ spear, whereon he crossed the stonethreshold and came inside. Ulysses rose from his seat to give him placeas he entered, but Telemachus checked him; “Sit down, stranger,” saidhe, “I can easily find another seat, and there is one here who will layit for me.”Ulysses went back to his own place, and Eumaeus strewed some greenbrushwood on the floor and threw a sheepskin on top of it forTelemachus to sit upon. Then the swineherd brought them platters ofcold meat, the remains from what they had eaten the day before, and hefilled the bread baskets with bread as fast as he could. He mixed winealso in bowls of ivy-wood, and took his seat facing Ulysses. Then theylaid their hands on the good things that were before them, and as soonas they had had enough to eat and drink Telemachus said to Eumaeus,“Old friend, where does this stranger come from? How did his crew bringhim to Ithaca, and who were they?—for assuredly he did not come here byland.”To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “My son, I will tell you thereal truth. He says he is a Cretan, and that he has been a greattraveller. At this moment he is running away from a Thesprotian ship,and has taken refuge at my station, so I will put him into your hands.Do whatever you like with him, only remember that he is yoursuppliant.”“I am very much distressed,” said Telemachus, “by what you have justtold me. How can I take this stranger into my house? I am as yet young,and am not strong enough to hold my own if any man attacks me. Mymother cannot make up her mind whether to stay where she is and lookafter the house out of respect for public opinion and the memory of herhusband, or whether the time is now come for her to take the best manof those who are wooing her, and the one who will make her the mostadvantageous offer; still, as the stranger has come to your station Iwill find him a cloak and shirt of good wear, with a sword and sandals,and will send him wherever he wants to go. Or if you like you can keephim here at the station, and I will send him clothes and food that hemay be no burden on you and on your men; but I will not have him gonear the suitors, for they are very insolent, and are sure to ill treathim in a way that would greatly grieve me; no matter how valiant a manmay be he can do nothing against numbers, for they will be too strongfor him.”Then Ulysses said, “Sir, it is right that I should say somethingmyself. I am much shocked about what you have said about the insolentway in which the suitors are behaving in despite of such a man as youare. Tell me, do you submit to such treatment tamely, or has some godset your people against you? May you not complain of your brothers—forit is to these that a man may look for support, however great hisquarrel may be? I wish I were as young as you are and in my presentmind; if I were son to Ulysses, or, indeed, Ulysses himself, I wouldrather some one came and cut my head off, but I would go to the houseand be the bane of every one of these men.139 If they were too many forme—I being single-handed—I would rather die fighting in my own housethan see such disgraceful sights day after day, strangers grosslymaltreated, and men dragging the women servants about the house in anunseemly way, wine drawn recklessly, and bread wasted all to no purposefor an end that shall never be accomplished.”And Telemachus answered, “I will tell you truly everything. There is noenmity between me and my people, nor can I complain of brothers, towhom a man may look for support however great his quarrel may be. Jovehas made us a race of only sons. Laertes was the only son of Arceisius,and Ulysses only son of Laertes. I am myself the only son of Ulysseswho left me behind him when he went away, so that I have never been ofany use to him. Hence it comes that my house is in the hands ofnumberless marauders; for the chiefs from all the neighbouring islands,Dulichium, Same, Zacynthus, as also all the principal men of Ithacaitself, are eating up my house under the pretext of paying court to mymother, who will neither say point blank that she will not marry, noryet bring matters to an end, so they are making havoc of my estate, andbefore long will do so with myself into the bargain. The issue,however, rests with heaven. But do you, old friend Eumaeus, go at onceand tell Penelope that I am safe and have returned from Pylos. Tell itto herself alone, and then come back here without letting any one elseknow, for there are many who are plotting mischief against me.”“I understand and heed you,” replied Eumaeus; “you need instruct me nofurther, only as I am going that way say whether I had not better letpoor Laertes know that you are returned. He used to superintend thework on his farm in spite of his bitter sorrow about Ulysses, and hewould eat and drink at will along with his servants; but they tell methat from the day on which you set out for Pylos he has neither eatennor drunk as he ought to do, nor does he look after his farm, but sitsweeping and wasting the flesh from off his bones.”“More’s the pity,” answered Telemachus, “I am sorry for him, but wemust leave him to himself just now. If people could have everythingtheir own way, the first thing I should choose would be the return ofmy father; but go, and give your message; then make haste back again,and do not turn out of your way to tell Laertes. Tell my mother to sendone of her women secretly with the news at once, and let him hear itfrom her.”Thus did he urge the swineherd; Eumaeus, therefore, took his sandals,bound them to his feet, and started for the town. Minerva watched himwell off the station, and then came up to it in the form of awoman—fair, stately, and wise. She stood against the side of the entry,and revealed herself to Ulysses, but Telemachus could not see her, andknew not that she was there, for the gods do not let themselves be seenby everybody. Ulysses saw her, and so did the dogs, for they did notbark, but went scared and whining off to the other side of the yards.She nodded her head and motioned to Ulysses with her eyebrows; whereonhe left the hut and stood before her outside the main wall of theyards. Then she said to him:“Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, it is now time for you to tell yourson: do not keep him in the dark any longer, but lay your plans for thedestruction of the suitors, and then make for the town. I will not belong in joining you, for I too am eager for the fray.”As she spoke she touched him with her golden wand. First she threw afair clean shirt and cloak about his shoulders; then she made himyounger and of more imposing presence; she gave him back his colour,filled out his cheeks, and let his beard become dark again. Then shewent away and Ulysses came back inside the hut. His son was astoundedwhen he saw him, and turned his eyes away for fear he might be lookingupon a god.“Stranger,” said he, “how suddenly you have changed from what you werea moment or two ago. You are dressed differently and your colour is notthe same. Are you some one or other of the gods that live in heaven? Ifso, be propitious to me till I can make you due sacrifice and offeringsof wrought gold. Have mercy upon me.”And Ulysses said, “I am no god, why should you take me for one? I amyour father, on whose account you grieve and suffer so much at thehands of lawless men.”As he spoke he kissed his son, and a tear fell from his cheek on to theground, for he had restrained all tears till now. But Telemachus couldnot yet believe that it was his father, and said:“You are not my father, but some god is flattering me with vain hopesthat I may grieve the more hereafter; no mortal man could of himselfcontrive to do as you have been doing, and make yourself old and youngat a moment’s notice, unless a god were with him. A second ago you wereold and all in rags, and now you are like some god come down fromheaven.”Ulysses answered, “Telemachus, you ought not to be so immeasurablyastonished at my being really here. There is no other Ulysses who willcome hereafter. Such as I am, it is I, who after long wandering andmuch hardship have got home in the twentieth year to my own country.What you wonder at is the work of the redoubtable goddess Minerva, whodoes with me whatever she will, for she can do what she pleases. At onemoment she makes me like a beggar, and the next I am a young man withgood clothes on my back; it is an easy matter for the gods who live inheaven to make any man look either rich or poor.”As he spoke he sat down, and Telemachus threw his arms about his fatherand wept. They were both so much moved that they cried aloud likeeagles or vultures with crooked talons that have been robbed of theirhalf fledged young by peasants. Thus piteously did they weep, and thesun would have gone down upon their mourning if Telemachus had notsuddenly said, “In what ship, my dear father, did your crew bring youto Ithaca? Of what nation did they declare themselves to be—for youcannot have come by land?”“I will tell you the truth, my son,” replied Ulysses. “It was thePhaeacians who brought me here. They are great sailors, and are in thehabit of giving escorts to any one who reaches their coasts. They tookme over the sea while I was fast asleep, and landed me in Ithaca, aftergiving me many presents in bronze, gold, and raiment. These things byheaven’s mercy are lying concealed in a cave, and I am now come here onthe suggestion of Minerva that we may consult about killing ourenemies. First, therefore, give me a list of the suitors, with theirnumber, that I may learn who, and how many, they are. I can then turnthe matter over in my mind, and see whether we two can fight the wholebody of them ourselves, or whether we must find others to help us.”To this Telemachus answered, “Father, I have always heard of yourrenown both in the field and in council, but the task you talk of is avery great one: I am awed at the mere thought of it; two men cannotstand against many and brave ones. There are not ten suitors only, nortwice ten, but ten many times over; you shall learn their number atonce. There are fifty-two chosen youths from Dulichium, and they havesix servants; from Same there are twenty-four; twenty young Achaeansfrom Zacynthus, and twelve from Ithaca itself, all of them well born.They have with them a servant Medon, a bard, and two men who can carveat table. If we face such numbers as this, you may have bitter cause torue your coming, and your revenge. See whether you cannot think of someone who would be willing to come and help us.”“Listen to me,” replied Ulysses, “and think whether Minerva and herfather Jove may seem sufficient, or whether I am to try and find someone else as well.”“Those whom you have named,” answered Telemachus, “are a couple of goodallies, for though they dwell high up among the clouds they have powerover both gods and men.”“These two,” continued Ulysses, “will not keep long out of the fray,when the suitors and we join fight in my house. Now, therefore, returnhome early to-morrow morning, and go about among the suitors as before.Later on the swineherd will bring me to the city disguised as amiserable old beggar. If you see them ill treating me, steel your heartagainst my sufferings; even though they drag me feet foremost out ofthe house, or throw things at me, look on and do nothing beyond gentlytrying to make them behave more reasonably; but they will not listen toyou, for the day of their reckoning is at hand. Furthermore I say, andlay my saying to your heart; when Minerva shall put it in my mind, Iwill nod my head to you, and on seeing me do this you must collect allthe armour that is in the house and hide it in the strong store room.Make some excuse when the suitors ask you why you are removing it; saythat you have taken it to be out of the way of the smoke, inasmuch asit is no longer what it was when Ulysses went away, but has becomesoiled and begrimed with soot. Add to this more particularly that youare afraid Jove may set them on to quarrel over their wine, and thatthey may do each other some harm which may disgrace both banquet andwooing, for the sight of arms sometimes tempts people to use them. Butleave a sword and a spear apiece for yourself and me, and a couple ofoxhide shields so that we can snatch them up at any moment; Jove andMinerva will then soon quiet these people. There is also anothermatter; if you are indeed my son and my blood runs in your veins, letno one know that Ulysses is within the house—neither Laertes, nor yetthe swineherd, nor any of the servants, nor even Penelope herself. Letyou and me exploit the women alone, and let us also make trial of someother of the men servants, to see who is on our side and whose hand isagainst us.”“Father,” replied Telemachus, “you will come to know me by and by, andwhen you do you will find that I can keep your counsel. I do not think,however, the plan you propose will turn out well for either of us.Think it over. It will take us a long time to go the round of the farmsand exploit the men, and all the time the suitors will be wasting yourestate with impunity and without compunction. Prove the women by allmeans, to see who are disloyal and who guiltless, but I am not infavour of going round and trying the men. We can attend to that lateron, if you really have some sign from Jove that he will support you.”Thus did they converse, and meanwhile the ship which had broughtTelemachus and his crew from Pylos had reached the town of Ithaca. Whenthey had come inside the harbour they drew the ship on to the land;their servants came and took their armour from them, and they left allthe presents at the house of Clytius. Then they sent a servant to tellPenelope that Telemachus had gone into the country, but had sent theship to the town to prevent her from being alarmed and made unhappy.This servant and Eumaeus happened to meet when they were both on thesame errand of going to tell Penelope. When they reached the House, theservant stood up and said to the queen in the presence of the waitingwomen, “Your son, Madam, is now returned from Pylos”; but Eumaeus wentclose up to Penelope, and said privately all that her son had biddenhim tell her. When he had given his message he left the house with itsoutbuildings and went back to his pigs again.The suitors were surprised and angry at what had happened, so they wentoutside the great wall that ran round the outer court, and held acouncil near the main entrance. Eurymachus, son of Polybus, was thefirst to speak.“My friends,” said he, “this voyage of Telemachus’s is a very seriousmatter; we had made sure that it would come to nothing. Now, however,let us draw a ship into the water, and get a crew together to sendafter the others and tell them to come back as fast as they can.”He had hardly done speaking when Amphinomus turned in his place and sawthe ship inside the harbour, with the crew lowering her sails, andputting by their oars; so he laughed, and said to the others, “We neednot send them any message, for they are here. Some god must have toldthem, or else they saw the ship go by, and could not overtake her.”On this they rose and went to the water side. The crew then drew theship on shore; their servants took their armour from them, and theywent up in a body to the place of assembly, but they would not let anyone old or young sit along with them, and Antinous, son of Eupeithes,spoke first.“Good heavens,” said he, “see how the gods have saved this man fromdestruction. We kept a succession of scouts upon the headlands all daylong, and when the sun was down we never went on shore to sleep, butwaited in the ship all night till morning in the hope of capturing andkilling him; but some god has conveyed him home in spite of us. Let usconsider how we can make an end of him. He must not escape us; ouraffair is never likely to come off while he is alive, for he is veryshrewd, and public feeling is by no means all on our side. We must makehaste before he can call the Achaeans in assembly; he will lose no timein doing so, for he will be furious with us, and will tell all theworld how we plotted to kill him, but failed to take him. The peoplewill not like this when they come to know of it; we must see that theydo us no hurt, nor drive us from our own country into exile. Let us tryand lay hold of him either on his farm away from the town, or on theroad hither. Then we can divide up his property amongst us, and let hismother and the man who marries her have the house. If this does notplease you, and you wish Telemachus to live on and hold his father’sproperty, then we must not gather here and eat up his goods in thisway, but must make our offers to Penelope each from his own house, andshe can marry the man who will give the most for her, and whose lot itis to win her.”They all held their peace until Amphinomus rose to speak. He was theson of Nisus, who was son to king Aretias, and he was foremost amongall the suitors from the wheat-growing and well grassed island ofDulichium; his conversation, moreover, was more agreeable to Penelopethan that of any of the other suitors, for he was a man of good naturaldisposition. “My friends,” said he, speaking to them plainly and in allhonestly, “I am not in favour of killing Telemachus. It is a heinousthing to kill one who is of noble blood. Let us first take counsel ofthe gods, and if the oracles of Jove advise it, I will both help tokill him myself, and will urge everyone else to do so; but if theydissuade us, I would have you hold your hands.”Thus did he speak, and his words pleased them well, so they roseforthwith and went to the house of Ulysses, where they took theiraccustomed seats.Then Penelope resolved that she would show herself to the suitors. Sheknew of the plot against Telemachus, for the servant Medon hadoverheard their counsels and had told her; she went down therefore tothe court attended by her maidens, and when she reached the suitors shestood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloisterholding a veil before her face, and rebuked Antinous saying:“Antinous, insolent and wicked schemer, they say you are the bestspeaker and counsellor of any man your own age in Ithaca, but you arenothing of the kind. Madman, why should you try to compass the death ofTelemachus, and take no heed of suppliants, whose witness is Jovehimself? It is not right for you to plot thus against one another. Doyou not remember how your father fled to this house in fear of thepeople, who were enraged against him for having gone with some Taphianpirates and plundered the Thesprotians who were at peace with us? Theywanted to tear him in pieces and eat up everything he had, but Ulyssesstayed their hands although they were infuriated, and now you devourhis property without paying for it, and break my heart by wooing hiswife and trying to kill his son. Leave off doing so, and stop theothers also.”To this Eurymachus son of Polybus answered, “Take heart, Queen Penelopedaughter of Icarius, and do not trouble yourself about these matters.The man is not yet born, nor never will be, who shall lay hands uponyour son Telemachus, while I yet live to look upon the face of theearth. I say—and it shall surely be—that my spear shall be reddenedwith his blood; for many a time has Ulysses taken me on his knees, heldwine up to my lips to drink, and put pieces of meat into my hands.Therefore Telemachus is much the dearest friend I have, and has nothingto fear from the hands of us suitors. Of course, if death comes to himfrom the gods, he cannot escape it.” He said this to quiet her, but inreality he was plotting against Telemachus.Then Penelope went upstairs again and mourned her husband till Minervashed sleep over her eyes. In the evening Eumaeus got back to Ulyssesand his son, who had just sacrificed a young pig of a year old and werehelping one another to get supper ready; Minerva therefore came up toUlysses, turned him into an old man with a stroke of her wand, and cladhim in his old clothes again, for fear that the swineherd mightrecognise him and not keep the secret, but go and tell Penelope.Telemachus was the first to speak. “So you have got back, Eumaeus,”said he. “What is the news of the town? Have the suitors returned, orare they still waiting over yonder, to take me on my way home?”“I did not think of asking about that,” replied Eumaeus, “when I was inthe town. I thought I would give my message and come back as soon as Icould. I met a man sent by those who had gone with you to Pylos, and hewas the first to tell the news to your mother, but I can say what I sawwith my own eyes; I had just got on to the crest of the hill of Mercuryabove the town when I saw a ship coming into harbour with a number ofmen in her. They had many shields and spears, and I thought it was thesuitors, but I cannot be sure.”On hearing this Telemachus smiled to his father, but so that Eumaeuscould not see him.Then, when they had finished their work and the meal was ready, theyate it, and every man had his full share so that all were satisfied. Assoon as they had had enough to eat and drink, they laid down to restand enjoyed the boon of sleep.BOOK XVIITELEMACHUS AND HIS MOTHER MEET—ULYSSES AND EUMAEUS COME DOWN TO THETOWN, AND ULYSSES IS INSULTED BY MELANTHIUS—HE IS RECOGNISED BY THE DOGARGOS—HE IS INSULTED AND PRESENTLY STRUCK BY ANTINOUS WITH ASTOOL—PENELOPE DESIRES THAT HE SHALL BE SENT TO HER.When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Telemachusbound on his sandals and took a strong spear that suited his hands, forhe wanted to go into the city. “Old friend,” said he to the swineherd,“I will now go to the town and show myself to my mother, for she willnever leave off grieving till she has seen me. As for this unfortunatestranger, take him to the town and let him beg there of any one whowill give him a drink and a piece of bread. I have trouble enough of myown, and cannot be burdened with other people. If this makes him angryso much the worse for him, but I like to say what I mean.”Then Ulysses said, “Sir, I do not want to stay here; a beggar canalways do better in town than country, for any one who likes can givehim something. I am too old to care about remaining here at the beckand call of a master. Therefore let this man do as you have just toldhim, and take me to the town as soon as I have had a warm by the fire,and the day has got a little heat in it. My clothes are wretchedlythin, and this frosty morning I shall be perished with cold, for yousay the city is some way off.”On this Telemachus strode off through the yards, brooding his revengeupon the suitors. When he reached home he stood his spear against abearing-post of the cloister, crossed the stone floor of the cloisteritself, and went inside.Nurse Euryclea saw him long before any one else did. She was puttingthe fleeces on to the seats, and she burst out crying as she ran up tohim; all the other maids came up too, and covered his head andshoulders with their kisses. Penelope came out of her room looking likeDiana or Venus, and wept as she flung her arms about her son. Shekissed his forehead and both his beautiful eyes, “Light of my eyes,”she cried as she spoke fondly to him, “so you are come home again; Imade sure I was never going to see you any more. To think of yourhaving gone off to Pylos without saying anything about it or obtainingmy consent. But come, tell me what you saw.”“Do not scold me, mother,” answered Telemachus, “nor vex me, seeingwhat a narrow escape I have had, but wash your face, change your dress,go upstairs with your maids, and promise full and sufficient hecatombsto all the gods if Jove will only grant us our revenge upon thesuitors. I must now go to the place of assembly to invite a strangerwho has come back with me from Pylos. I sent him on with my crew, andtold Piraeus to take him home and look after him till I could come forhim myself.”She heeded her son’s words, washed her face, changed her dress, andvowed full and sufficient hecatombs to all the gods if they would onlyvouchsafe her revenge upon the suitors.Telemachus went through, and out of, the cloisters spear in hand—notalone, for his two fleet dogs went with him. Minerva endowed him with apresence of such divine comeliness that all marvelled at him as he wentby, and the suitors gathered round him with fair words in their mouthsand malice in their hearts; but he avoided them, and went to sit withMentor, Antiphus, and Halitherses, old friends of his father’s house,and they made him tell them all that had happened to him. Then Piraeuscame up with Theoclymenus, whom he had escorted through the town to theplace of assembly, whereon Telemachus at once joined them. Piraeus wasfirst to speak: “Telemachus,” said he, “I wish you would send some ofyour women to my house to take away the presents Menelaus gave you.”“We do not know, Piraeus,” answered Telemachus, “what may happen. Ifthe suitors kill me in my own house and divide my property among them,I would rather you had the presents than that any of those peopleshould get hold of them. If on the other hand I managed to kill them, Ishall be much obliged if you will kindly bring me my presents.”With these words he took Theoclymenus to his own house. When they gotthere they laid their cloaks on the benches and seats, went into thebaths, and washed themselves. When the maids had washed and anointedthem, and had given them cloaks and shirts, they took their seats attable. A maid servant then brought them water in a beautiful goldenewer, and poured it into a silver basin for them to wash their hands;and she drew a clean table beside them. An upper servant brought thembread and offered them many good things of what there was in the house.Opposite them sat Penelope, reclining on a couch by one of thebearing-posts of the cloister, and spinning. Then they laid their handson the good things that were before them, and as soon as they had hadenough to eat and drink Penelope said:“Telemachus, I shall go upstairs and lie down on that sad couch, whichI have not ceased to water with my tears, from the day Ulysses set outfor Troy with the sons of Atreus. You failed, however, to make it clearto me before the suitors came back to the house, whether or no you hadbeen able to hear anything about the return of your father.”“I will tell you then truth,” replied her son. “We went to Pylos andsaw Nestor, who took me to his house and treated me as hospitably asthough I were a son of his own who had just returned after a longabsence; so also did his sons; but he said he had not heard a word fromany human being about Ulysses, whether he was alive or dead. He sentme, therefore, with a chariot and horses to Menelaus. There I sawHelen, for whose sake so many, both Argives and Trojans, were inheaven’s wisdom doomed to suffer. Menelaus asked me what it was thathad brought me to Lacedaemon, and I told him the whole truth, whereonhe said, ‘So, then, these cowards would usurp a brave man’s bed? A hindmight as well lay her new-born young in the lair of a lion, and then gooff to feed in the forest or in some grassy dell. The lion, when hecomes back to his lair, will make short work with the pair of them, andso will Ulysses with these suitors. By father Jove, Minerva, andApollo, if Ulysses is still the man that he was when he wrestled withPhilomeleides in Lesbos, and threw him so heavily that all the Greekscheered him—if he is still such, and were to come near these suitors,they would have a short shrift and a sorry wedding. As regards yourquestion, however, I will not prevaricate nor deceive you, but what theold man of the sea told me, so much will I tell you in full. He said hecould see Ulysses on an island sorrowing bitterly in the house of thenymph Calypso, who was keeping him prisoner, and he could not reach hishome, for he had no ships nor sailors to take him over the sea.’ Thiswas what Menelaus told me, and when I had heard his story I came away;the gods then gave me a fair wind and soon brought me safe home again.”With these words he moved the heart of Penelope. Then Theoclymenus saidto her:“Madam, wife of Ulysses, Telemachus does not understand these things;listen therefore to me, for I can divine them surely, and will hidenothing from you. May Jove the king of heaven be my witness, and therites of hospitality, with that hearth of Ulysses to which I now come,that Ulysses himself is even now in Ithaca, and, either going about thecountry or staying in one place, is enquiring into all these evil deedsand preparing a day of reckoning for the suitors. I saw an omen when Iwas on the ship which meant this, and I told Telemachus about it.”“May it be even so,” answered Penelope; “if your words come true, youshall have such gifts and such good will from me that all who see youshall congratulate you.”Thus did they converse. Meanwhile the suitors were throwing discs, oraiming with spears at a mark on the levelled ground in front of thehouse, and behaving with all their old insolence. But when it was nowtime for dinner, and the flock of sheep and goats had come into thetown from all the country round, 140 with their shepherds as usual,then Medon, who was their favourite servant, and who waited upon themat table, said, “Now then, my young masters, you have had enough sport,so come inside that we may get dinner ready. Dinner is not a bad thing,at dinner time.”They left their sports as he told them, and when they were within thehouse, they laid their cloaks on the benches and seats inside, and thensacrificed some sheep, goats, pigs, and a heifer, all of them fat andwell grown.141 Thus they made ready for their meal. In the meantimeUlysses and the swineherd were about starting for the town, and theswineherd said, “Stranger, I suppose you still want to go to townto-day, as my master said you were to do; for my own part I should haveliked you to stay here as a station hand, but I must do as my mastertells me, or he will scold me later on, and a scolding from one’smaster is a very serious thing. Let us then be off, for it is now broadday; it will be night again directly and then you will find itcolder.”142“I know, and understand you,” replied Ulysses; “you need say no more.Let us be going, but if you have a stick ready cut, let me have it towalk with, for you say the road is a very rough one.”As he spoke he threw his shabby old tattered wallet over his shoulders,by the cord from which it hung, and Eumaeus gave him a stick to hisliking. The two then started, leaving the station in charge of the dogsand herdsmen who remained behind; the swineherd led the way and hismaster followed after, looking like some broken down old tramp as heleaned upon his staff, and his clothes were all in rags. When they hadgot over the rough steep ground and were nearing the city, they reachedthe fountain from which the citizens drew their water. This had beenmade by Ithacus, Neritus, and Polyctor. There was a grove ofwater-loving poplars planted in a circle all round it, and the clearcold water came down to it from a rock high up,143 while above thefountain there was an altar to the nymphs, at which all wayfarers usedto sacrifice. Here Melanthius son of Dolius overtook them as he wasdriving down some goats, the best in his flock, for the suitors’dinner, and there were two shepherds with him. When he saw Eumaeus andUlysses he reviled them with outrageous and unseemly language, whichmade Ulysses very angry.“There you go,” cried he, “and a precious pair you are. See how heavenbrings birds of the same feather to one another. Where, pray, masterswineherd, are you taking this poor miserable object? It would make anyone sick to see such a creature at table. A fellow like this never wona prize for anything in his life, but will go about rubbing hisshoulders against every man’s door post, and begging, not for swordsand cauldrons144 like a man, but only for a few scraps not worthbegging for. If you would give him to me for a hand on my station, hemight do to clean out the folds, or bring a bit of sweet feed to thekids, and he could fatten his thighs as much as he pleased on whey; buthe has taken to bad ways and will not go about any kind of work; hewill do nothing but beg victuals all the town over, to feed hisinsatiable belly. I say, therefore—and it shall surely be—if he goesnear Ulysses’ house he will get his head broken by the stools they willfling at him, till they turn him out.”On this, as he passed, he gave Ulysses a kick on the hip out of purewantonness, but Ulysses stood firm, and did not budge from the path.For a moment he doubted whether or no to fly at Melanthius and kill himwith his staff, or fling him to the ground and beat his brains out; heresolved, however, to endure it and keep himself in check, but theswineherd looked straight at Melanthius and rebuked him, lifting up hishands and praying to heaven as he did so.“Fountain nymphs,” he cried, “children of Jove, if ever Ulysses burnedyou thigh bones covered with fat whether of lambs or kids, grant myprayer that heaven may send him home. He would soon put an end to theswaggering threats with which such men as you go about insultingpeople—gadding all over the town while your flocks are going to ruinthrough bad shepherding.”Then Melanthius the goatherd answered, “You ill conditioned cur, whatare you talking about? Some day or other I will put you on board shipand take you to a foreign country, where I can sell you and pocket themoney you will fetch. I wish I were as sure that Apollo would strikeTelemachus dead this very day, or that the suitors would kill him, as Iam that Ulysses will never come home again.”With this he left them to come on at their leisure, while he wentquickly forward and soon reached the house of his master. When he gotthere he went in and took his seat among the suitors oppositeEurymachus, who liked him better than any of the others. The servantsbrought him a portion of meat, and an upper woman servant set breadbefore him that he might eat. Presently Ulysses and the swineherd cameup to the house and stood by it, amid a sound of music, for Phemius wasjust beginning to sing to the suitors. Then Ulysses took hold of theswineherd’s hand, and said:“Eumaeus, this house of Ulysses is a very fine place. No matter how faryou go, you will find few like it. One building keeps following onafter another. The outer court has a wall with battlements all roundit; the doors are double folding, and of good workmanship; it would bea hard matter to take it by force of arms. I perceive, too, that thereare many people banqueting within it, for there is a smell of roastmeat, and I hear a sound of music, which the gods have made to go alongwith feasting.”Then Eumaeus said, “You have perceived aright, as indeed you generallydo; but let us think what will be our best course. Will you go insidefirst and join the suitors, leaving me here behind you, or will youwait here and let me go in first? But do not wait long, or some one maysee you loitering about outside, and throw something at you. Considerthis matter I pray you.”And Ulysses answered, “I understand and heed. Go in first and leave mehere where I am. I am quite used to being beaten and having thingsthrown at me. I have been so much buffeted about in war and by sea thatI am case-hardened, and this too may go with the rest. But a man cannothide away the cravings of a hungry belly; this is an enemy which givesmuch trouble to all men; it is because of this that ships are fittedout to sail the seas, and to make war upon other people.”As they were thus talking, a dog that had been lying asleep raised hishead and pricked up his ears. This was Argos, whom Ulysses had bredbefore setting out for Troy, but he had never had any work out of him.In the old days he used to be taken out by the young men when they wenthunting wild goats, or deer, or hares, but now that his master was gonehe was lying neglected on the heaps of mule and cow dung that lay infront of the stable doors till the men should come and draw it away tomanure the great close; and he was full of fleas. As soon as he sawUlysses standing there, he dropped his ears and wagged his tail, but hecould not get close up to his master. When Ulysses saw the dog on theother side of the yard, he dashed a tear from his eyes without Eumaeusseeing it, and said:“Eumaeus, what a noble hound that is over yonder on the manure heap:his build is splendid; is he as fine a fellow as he looks, or is heonly one of those dogs that come begging about a table, and are keptmerely for show?”“This hound,” answered Eumaeus, “belonged to him who has died in a farcountry. If he were what he was when Ulysses left for Troy, he wouldsoon show you what he could do. There was not a wild beast in theforest that could get away from him when he was once on its tracks. Butnow he has fallen on evil times, for his master is dead and gone, andthe women take no care of him. Servants never do their work when theirmaster’s hand is no longer over them, for Jove takes half the goodnessout of a man when he makes a slave of him.”As he spoke he went inside the buildings to the cloister where thesuitors were, but Argos died as soon as he had recognised his master.Telemachus saw Eumaeus long before any one else did, and beckoned himto come and sit beside him; so he looked about and saw a seat lyingnear where the carver sat serving out their portions to the suitors; hepicked it up, brought it to Telemachus’s table, and sat down oppositehim. Then the servant brought him his portion, and gave him bread fromthe bread-basket.Immediately afterwards Ulysses came inside, looking like a poormiserable old beggar, leaning on his staff and with his clothes all inrags. He sat down upon the threshold of ash-wood just inside the doorsleading from the outer to the inner court, and against a bearing-postof cypress-wood which the carpenter had skilfully planed, and had madeto join truly with rule and line. Telemachus took a whole loaf from thebread-basket, with as much meat as he could hold in his two hands, andsaid to Eumaeus, “Take this to the stranger, and tell him to go theround of the suitors, and beg from them; a beggar must not beshamefaced.”So Eumaeus went up to him and said, “Stranger, Telemachus sends youthis, and says you are to go the round of the suitors begging, forbeggars must not be shamefaced.”Ulysses answered, “May King Jove grant all happiness to Telemachus, andfulfil the desire of his heart.”Then with both hands he took what Telemachus had sent him, and laid iton the dirty old wallet at his feet. He went on eating it while thebard was singing, and had just finished his dinner as he left off. Thesuitors applauded the bard, whereon Minerva went up to Ulysses andprompted him to beg pieces of bread from each one of the suitors, thathe might see what kind of people they were, and tell the good from thebad; but come what might she was not going to save a single one ofthem. Ulysses, therefore, went on his round, going from left to right,and stretched out his hands to beg as though he were a real beggar.Some of them pitied him, and were curious about him, asking one anotherwho he was and where he came from; whereon the goatherd Melanthiussaid, “Suitors of my noble mistress, I can tell you something abouthim, for I have seen him before. The swineherd brought him here, but Iknow nothing about the man himself, nor where he comes from.”On this Antinous began to abuse the swineherd. “You precious idiot,” hecried, “what have you brought this man to town for? Have we not trampsand beggars enough already to pester us as we sit at meat? Do you thinkit a small thing that such people gather here to waste your master’sproperty—and must you needs bring this man as well?”And Eumaeus answered, “Antinous, your birth is good but your wordsevil. It was no doing of mine that he came here. Who is likely toinvite a stranger from a foreign country, unless it be one of those whocan do public service as a seer, a healer of hurts, a carpenter, or abard who can charm us with his singing? Such men are welcome all theworld over, but no one is likely to ask a beggar who will only worryhim. You are always harder on Ulysses’ servants than any of the othersuitors are, and above all on me, but I do not care so long asTelemachus and Penelope are alive and here.”But Telemachus said, “Hush, do not answer him; Antinous has thebitterest tongue of all the suitors, and he makes the others worse.”Then turning to Antinous he said, “Antinous, you take as much care ofmy interests as though I were your son. Why should you want to see thisstranger turned out of the house? Heaven forbid; take something andgive it him yourself; I do not grudge it; I bid you take it. Never mindmy mother, nor any of the other servants in the house; but I know youwill not do what I say, for you are more fond of eating things yourselfthan of giving them to other people.”“What do you mean, Telemachus,” replied Antinous, “by this swaggeringtalk? If all the suitors were to give him as much as I will, he wouldnot come here again for another three months.”As he spoke he drew the stool on which he rested his dainty feet fromunder the table, and made as though he would throw it at Ulysses, butthe other suitors all gave him something, and filled his wallet withbread and meat; he was about, therefore, to go back to the thresholdand eat what the suitors had given him, but he first went up toAntinous and said:“Sir, give me something; you are not, surely, the poorest man here; youseem to be a chief, foremost among them all; therefore you should bethe better giver, and I will tell far and wide of your bounty. I toowas a rich man once, and had a fine house of my own; in those days Igave to many a tramp such as I now am, no matter who he might be norwhat he wanted. I had any number of servants, and all the other thingswhich people have who live well and are accounted wealthy, but itpleased Jove to take all away from me. He sent me with a band of rovingrobbers to Egypt; it was a long voyage and I was undone by it. Istationed my ships in the river Aegyptus, and bade my men stay by themand keep guard over them, while I sent out scouts to reconnoitre fromevery point of vantage.“But the men disobeyed my orders, took to their own devices, andravaged the land of the Egyptians, killing the men, and taking theirwives and children captives. The alarm was soon carried to the city,and when they heard the war-cry, the people came out at daybreak tillthe plain was filled with soldiers horse and foot, and with the gleamof armour. Then Jove spread panic among my men, and they would nolonger face the enemy, for they found themselves surrounded. TheEgyptians killed many of us, and took the rest alive to do forcedlabour for them; as for myself, they gave me to a friend who met them,to take to Cyprus, Dmetor by name, son of Iasus, who was a great man inCyprus. Thence I am come hither in a state of great misery.”Then Antinous said, “What god can have sent such a pestilence to plagueus during our dinner? Get out, into the open part of the court,145 or Iwill give you Egypt and Cyprus over again for your insolence andimportunity; you have begged of all the others, and they have given youlavishly, for they have abundance round them, and it is easy to be freewith other people’s property when there is plenty of it.”On this Ulysses began to move off, and said, “Your looks, my fine sir,are better than your breeding; if you were in your own house you wouldnot spare a poor man so much as a pinch of salt, for though you are inanother man’s, and surrounded with abundance, you cannot find it in youto give him even a piece of bread.”This made Antinous very angry, and he scowled at him saying, “You shallpay for this before you get clear of the court.” With these words hethrew a footstool at him, and hit him on the right shoulder blade nearthe top of his back. Ulysses stood firm as a rock and the blow did noteven stagger him, but he shook his head in silence as he brooded on hisrevenge. Then he went back to the threshold and sat down there, layinghis well filled wallet at his feet.“Listen to me,” he cried, “you suitors of Queen Penelope, that I mayspeak even as I am minded. A man knows neither ache nor pain if he getshit while fighting for his money, or for his sheep or his cattle; andeven so Antinous has hit me while in the service of my miserable belly,which is always getting people into trouble. Still, if the poor havegods and avenging deities at all, I pray them that Antinous may come toa bad end before his marriage.”“Sit where you are, and eat your victuals in silence, or be offelsewhere,” shouted Antinous. “If you say more I will have you draggedhand and foot through the courts, and the servants shall flay youalive.”The other suitors were much displeased at this, and one of the youngmen said, “Antinous, you did ill in striking that poor wretch of atramp: it will be worse for you if he should turn out to be somegod—and we know the gods go about disguised in all sorts of ways aspeople from foreign countries, and travel about the world to see who doamiss and who righteously.”146Thus said the suitors, but Antinous paid them no heed. MeanwhileTelemachus was furious about the blow that had been given to hisfather, and though no tear fell from him, he shook his head in silenceand brooded on his revenge.Now when Penelope heard that the beggar had been struck in thebanqueting-cloister, she said before her maids, “Would that Apollowould so strike you, Antinous,” and her waiting woman Eurynomeanswered, “If our prayers were answered not one of the suitors wouldever again see the sun rise.” Then Penelope said, “Nurse,147 I hateevery single one of them, for they mean nothing but mischief, but Ihate Antinous like the darkness of death itself. A poor unfortunatetramp has come begging about the house for sheer want. Every one elsehas given him something to put in his wallet, but Antinous has hit himon the right shoulder-blade with a footstool.”Thus did she talk with her maids as she sat in her own room, and in themeantime Ulysses was getting his dinner. Then she called for theswineherd and said, “Eumaeus, go and tell the stranger to come here, Iwant to see him and ask him some questions. He seems to have travelledmuch, and he may have seen or heard something of my unhappy husband.”To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “If these Achaeans, Madam,would only keep quiet, you would be charmed with the history of hisadventures. I had him three days and three nights with me in my hut,which was the first place he reached after running away from his ship,and he has not yet completed the story of his misfortunes. If he hadbeen the most heaven-taught minstrel in the whole world, on whose lipsall hearers hang entranced, I could not have been more charmed as I satin my hut and listened to him. He says there is an old friendshipbetween his house and that of Ulysses, and that he comes from Cretewhere the descendants of Minos live, after having been driven hitherand thither by every kind of misfortune; he also declares that he hasheard of Ulysses as being alive and near at hand among theThesprotians, and that he is bringing great wealth home with him.”“Call him here, then,” said Penelope, “that I too may hear his story.As for the suitors, let them take their pleasure indoors or out as theywill, for they have nothing to fret about. Their corn and wine remainunwasted in their houses with none but servants to consume them, whilethey keep hanging about our house day after day sacrificing our oxen,sheep, and fat goats for their banquets, and never giving so much as athought to the quantity of wine they drink. No estate can stand suchrecklessness, for we have now no Ulysses to protect us. If he were tocome again, he and his son would soon have their revenge.”As she spoke Telemachus sneezed so loudly that the whole houseresounded with it. Penelope laughed when she heard this, and said toEumaeus, “Go and call the stranger; did you not hear how my son sneezedjust as I was speaking? This can only mean that all the suitors aregoing to be killed, and that not one of them shall escape. FurthermoreI say, and lay my saying to your heart: if I am satisfied that thestranger is speaking the truth I shall give him a shirt and cloak ofgood wear.”When Eumaeus heard this he went straight to Ulysses and said, “Fatherstranger, my mistress Penelope, mother of Telemachus, has sent for you;she is in great grief, but she wishes to hear anything you can tell herabout her husband, and if she is satisfied that you are speaking thetruth, she will give you a shirt and cloak, which are the very thingsthat you are most in want of. As for bread, you can get enough of thatto fill your belly, by begging about the town, and letting those givethat will.”“I will tell Penelope,” answered Ulysses, “nothing but what is strictlytrue. I know all about her husband, and have been partner with him inaffliction, but I am afraid of passing through this crowd of cruelsuitors, for their pride and insolence reach heaven. Just now,moreover, as I was going about the house without doing any harm, a mangave me a blow that hurt me very much, but neither Telemachus nor anyone else defended me. Tell Penelope, therefore, to be patient and waittill sundown. Let her give me a seat close up to the fire, for myclothes are worn very thin—you know they are, for you have seen themever since I first asked you to help me—she can then ask me about thereturn of her husband.”The swineherd went back when he heard this, and Penelope said as shesaw him cross the threshold, “Why do you not bring him here, Eumaeus?Is he afraid that some one will ill-treat him, or is he shy of cominginside the house at all? Beggars should not be shamefaced.”To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “The stranger is quitereasonable. He is avoiding the suitors, and is only doing what any oneelse would do. He asks you to wait till sundown, and it will be muchbetter, madam, that you should have him all to yourself, when you canhear him and talk to him as you will.”“The man is no fool,” answered Penelope, “it would very likely be as hesays, for there are no such abominable people in the whole world asthese men are.”When she had done speaking Eumaeus went back to the suitors, for he hadexplained everything. Then he went up to Telemachus and said in his earso that none could overhear him, “My dear sir, I will now go back tothe pigs, to see after your property and my own business. You will lookto what is going on here, but above all be careful to keep out ofdanger, for there are many who bear you ill will. May Jove bring themto a bad end before they do us a mischief.”“Very well,” replied Telemachus, “go home when you have had yourdinner, and in the morning come here with the victims we are tosacrifice for the day. Leave the rest to heaven and me.”On this Eumaeus took his seat again, and when he had finished hisdinner he left the courts and the cloister with the men at table, andwent back to his pigs. As for the suitors, they presently began toamuse themselves with singing and dancing, for it was now getting ontowards evening.BOOK XVIIITHE FIGHT WITH IRUS—ULYSSES WARNS AMPHINOMUS—PENELOPE GETS PRESENTSFROM THE SUITORS—THE BRAZIERS—ULYSSES REBUKES EURYMACHUS.Now there came a certain common tramp who used to go begging all overthe city of Ithaca, and was notorious as an incorrigible glutton anddrunkard. This man had no strength nor stay in him, but he was a greathulking fellow to look at; his real name, the one his mother gave him,was Arnaeus, but the young men of the place called him Irus,148 becausehe used to run errands for any one who would send him. As soon as hecame he began to insult Ulysses, and to try and drive him out of hisown house.“Be off, old man,” he cried, “from the doorway, or you shall be draggedout neck and heels. Do you not see that they are all giving me thewink, and wanting me to turn you out by force, only I do not like to doso? Get up then, and go of yourself, or we shall come to blows.”Ulysses frowned on him and said, “My friend, I do you no manner ofharm; people give you a great deal, but I am not jealous. There is roomenough in this doorway for the pair of us, and you need not grudge methings that are not yours to give. You seem to be just such anothertramp as myself, but perhaps the gods will give us better luck by andby. Do not, however, talk too much about fighting or you will incenseme, and old though I am, I shall cover your mouth and chest with blood.I shall have more peace tomorrow if I do, for you will not come to thehouse of Ulysses any more.”Irus was very angry and answered, “You filthy glutton, you run ontrippingly like an old fish-fag. I have a good mind to lay both handsabout you, and knock your teeth out of your head like so many boar’stusks. Get ready, therefore, and let these people here stand by andlook on. You will never be able to fight one who is so much youngerthan yourself.”Thus roundly did they rate one another on the smooth pavement in frontof the doorway,149 and when Antinous saw what was going on he laughedheartily and said to the others, “This is the finest sport that youever saw; heaven never yet sent anything like it into this house. Thestranger and Irus have quarreled and are going to fight, let us setthem on to do so at once.”The suitors all came up laughing, and gathered round the two raggedtramps. “Listen to me,” said Antinous, “there are some goats’ paunchesdown at the fire, which we have filled with blood and fat, and setaside for supper; he who is victorious and proves himself to be thebetter man shall have his pick of the lot; he shall be free of ourtable and we will not allow any other beggar about the house at all.”The others all agreed, but Ulysses, to throw them off the scent, said,“Sirs, an old man like myself, worn out with suffering, cannot hold hisown against a young one; but my irrepressible belly urges me on, thoughI know it can only end in my getting a drubbing. You must swear,however that none of you will give me a foul blow to favour Irus andsecure him the victory.”They swore as he told them, and when they had completed their oathTelemachus put in a word and said, “Stranger, if you have a mind tosettle with this fellow, you need not be afraid of any one here.Whoever strikes you will have to fight more than one. I am host, andthe other chiefs, Antinous and Eurymachus, both of them men ofunderstanding, are of the same mind as I am.”Every one assented, and Ulysses girded his old rags about his loins,thus baring his stalwart thighs, his broad chest and shoulders, and hismighty arms; but Minerva came up to him and made his limbs evenstronger still. The suitors were beyond measure astonished, and onewould turn towards his neighbour saying, “The stranger has brought sucha thigh out of his old rags that there will soon be nothing left ofIrus.”Irus began to be very uneasy as he heard them, but the servants girdedhim by force, and brought him [into the open part of the court] in sucha fright that his limbs were all of a tremble. Antinous scolded him andsaid, “You swaggering bully, you ought never to have been born at allif you are afraid of such an old broken down creature as this tramp is.I say, therefore—and it shall surely be—if he beats you and proveshimself the better man, I shall pack you off on board ship to themainland and send you to king Echetus, who kills every one that comesnear him. He will cut off your nose and ears, and draw out yourentrails for the dogs to eat.”This frightened Irus still more, but they brought him into the middleof the court, and the two men raised their hands to fight. Then Ulyssesconsidered whether he should let drive so hard at him as to make an endof him then and there, or whether he should give him a lighter blowthat should only knock him down; in the end he deemed it best to givethe lighter blow for fear the Achaeans should begin to suspect who hewas. Then they began to fight, and Irus hit Ulysses on the rightshoulder; but Ulysses gave Irus a blow on the neck under the ear thatbroke in the bones of his skull, and the blood came gushing out of hismouth; he fell groaning in the dust, gnashing his teeth and kicking onthe ground, but the suitors threw up their hands and nearly died oflaughter, as Ulysses caught hold of him by the foot and dragged himinto the outer court as far as the gate-house. There he propped him upagainst the wall and put his staff in his hands. “Sit here,” said he,“and keep the dogs and pigs off; you are a pitiful creature, and if youtry to make yourself king of the beggars any more you shall fare stillworse.”Then he threw his dirty old wallet, all tattered and torn over hisshoulder with the cord by which it hung, and went back to sit down uponthe threshold; but the suitors went within the cloisters, laughing andsaluting him, “May Jove, and all the other gods,” said they, “grant youwhatever you want for having put an end to the importunity of thisinsatiable tramp. We will take him over to the mainland presently, toking Echetus, who kills every one that comes near him.”Ulysses hailed this as of good omen, and Antinous set a great goat’spaunch before him filled with blood and fat. Amphinomus took two loavesout of the bread-basket and brought them to him, pledging him as he didso in a golden goblet of wine. “Good luck to you,” he said, “fatherstranger, you are very badly off at present, but I hope you will havebetter times by and by.”To this Ulysses answered, “Amphinomus, you seem to be a man of goodunderstanding, as indeed you may well be, seeing whose son you are. Ihave heard your father well spoken of; he is Nisus of Dulichium, a manboth brave and wealthy. They tell me you are his son, and you appear tobe a considerable person; listen, therefore, and take heed to what I amsaying. Man is the vainest of all creatures that have their being uponearth. As long as heaven vouchsafes him health and strength, he thinksthat he shall come to no harm hereafter, and even when the blessed godsbring sorrow upon him, he bears it as he needs must, and makes the bestof it; for God almighty gives men their daily minds day by day. I knowall about it, for I was a rich man once, and did much wrong in thestubbornness of my pride, and in the confidence that my father and mybrothers would support me; therefore let a man fear God in all thingsalways, and take the good that heaven may see fit to send him withoutvain glory. Consider the infamy of what these suitors are doing; seehow they are wasting the estate, and doing dishonour to the wife, ofone who is certain to return some day, and that, too, not long hence.Nay, he will be here soon; may heaven send you home quietly first thatyou may not meet with him in the day of his coming, for once he is herethe suitors and he will not part bloodlessly.”With these words he made a drink-offering, and when he had drunk he putthe gold cup again into the hands of Amphinomus, who walked awayserious and bowing his head, for he foreboded evil. But even so he didnot escape destruction, for Minerva had doomed him to fall by the handof Telemachus. So he took his seat again at the place from which he hadcome.Then Minerva put it into the mind of Penelope to show herself to thesuitors, that she might make them still more enamoured of her, and winstill further honour from her son and husband. So she feigned a mockinglaugh and said, “Eurynome, I have changed my mind, and have a fancy toshow myself to the suitors although I detest them. I should like alsoto give my son a hint that he had better not have anything more to dowith them. They speak fairly enough but they mean mischief.”“My dear child,” answered Eurynome, “all that you have said is true, goand tell your son about it, but first wash yourself and anoint yourface. Do not go about with your cheeks all covered with tears; it isnot right that you should grieve so incessantly; for Telemachus, whomyou always prayed that you might live to see with a beard, is alreadygrown up.”“I know, Eurynome,” replied Penelope, “that you mean well, but do nottry and persuade me to wash and to anoint myself, for heaven robbed meof all my beauty on the day my husband sailed; nevertheless, tellAutonoe and Hippodamia that I want them. They must be with me when I amin the cloister; I am not going among the men alone; it would not beproper for me to do so.”On this the old woman150 went out of the room to bid the maids go totheir mistress. In the meantime Minerva bethought her of anothermatter, and sent Penelope off into a sweet slumber; so she lay down onher couch and her limbs became heavy with sleep. Then the goddess shedgrace and beauty over her that all the Achaeans might admire her. Shewashed her face with the ambrosial loveliness that Venus wears when shegoes dancing with the Graces; she made her taller and of a morecommanding figure, while as for her complexion it was whiter than sawnivory. When Minerva had done all this she went away, whereon the maidscame in from the women’s room and woke Penelope with the sound of theirtalking.“What an exquisitely delicious sleep I have been having,” said she, asshe passed her hands over her face, “in spite of all my misery. I wishDiana would let me die so sweetly now at this very moment, that I mightno longer waste in despair for the loss of my dear husband, whopossessed every kind of good quality and was the most distinguished manamong the Achaeans.”With these words she came down from her upper room, not alone butattended by two of her maidens, and when she reached the suitors shestood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister,holding a veil before her face, and with a staid maid servant on eitherside of her. As they beheld her the suitors were so overpowered andbecame so desperately enamoured of her, that each one prayed he mightwin her for his own bed fellow.“Telemachus,” said she, addressing her son, “I fear you are no longerso discreet and well conducted as you used to be. When you were youngeryou had a greater sense of propriety; now, however, that you are grownup, though a stranger to look at you would take you for the son of awell to do father as far as size and good looks go, your conduct is byno means what it should be. What is all this disturbance that has beengoing on, and how came you to allow a stranger to be so disgracefullyill-treated? What would have happened if he had suffered serious injurywhile a suppliant in our house? Surely this would have been verydiscreditable to you.”“I am not surprised, my dear mother, at your displeasure,” repliedTelemachus, “I understand all about it and know when things are not asthey should be, which I could not do when I was younger; I cannot,however, behave with perfect propriety at all times. First one and thenanother of these wicked people here keeps driving me out of my mind,and I have no one to stand by me. After all, however, this fightbetween Irus and the stranger did not turn out as the suitors meant itto do, for the stranger got the best of it. I wish Father Jove,Minerva, and Apollo would break the neck of every one of these wooersof yours, some inside the house and some out; and I wish they might allbe as limp as Irus is over yonder in the gate of the outer court. Seehow he nods his head like a drunken man; he has had such a thrashingthat he cannot stand on his feet nor get back to his home, whereverthat may be, for he has no strength left in him.”Thus did they converse. Eurymachus then came up and said, “QueenPenelope, daughter of Icarius, if all the Achaeans in Iasian Argoscould see you at this moment, you would have still more suitors in yourhouse by tomorrow morning, for you are the most admirable woman in thewhole world both as regards personal beauty and strength ofunderstanding.”To this Penelope replied, “Eurymachus, heaven robbed me of all mybeauty whether of face or figure when the Argives set sail for Troy andmy dear husband with them. If he were to return and look after myaffairs, I should both be more respected and show a better presence tothe world. As it is, I am oppressed with care, and with the afflictionswhich heaven has seen fit to heap upon me. My husband foresaw it all,and when he was leaving home he took my right wrist in his hand—‘Wife,’he said, ‘we shall not all of us come safe home from Troy, for theTrojans fight well both with bow and spear. They are excellent also atfighting from chariots, and nothing decides the issue of a fight soonerthan this. I know not, therefore, whether heaven will send me back toyou, or whether I may not fall over there at Troy. In the meantime doyou look after things here. Take care of my father and mother as atpresent, and even more so during my absence, but when you see our songrowing a beard, then marry whom you will, and leave this your presenthome.’ This is what he said and now it is all coming true. A night willcome when I shall have to yield myself to a marriage which I detest,for Jove has taken from me all hope of happiness. This further grief,moreover, cuts me to the very heart. You suitors are not wooing meafter the custom of my country. When men are courting a woman who theythink will be a good wife to them and who is of noble birth, and whenthey are each trying to win her for himself, they usually bring oxenand sheep to feast the friends of the lady, and they make hermagnificent presents, instead of eating up other people’s propertywithout paying for it.”This was what she said, and Ulysses was glad when he heard her tryingto get presents out of the suitors, and flattering them with fair wordswhich he knew she did not mean.Then Antinous said, “Queen Penelope, daughter of Icarius, take as manypresents as you please from any one who will give them to you; it isnot well to refuse a present; but we will not go about our business norstir from where we are, till you have married the best man among uswhoever he may be.”The others applauded what Antinous had said, and each one sent hisservant to bring his present. Antinous’s man returned with a large andlovely dress most exquisitely embroidered. It had twelve beautifullymade brooch pins of pure gold with which to fasten it. Eurymachusimmediately brought her a magnificent chain of gold and amber beadsthat gleamed like sunlight. Eurydamas’s two men returned with someearrings fashioned into three brilliant pendants which glistened mostbeautifully; while king Pisander son of Polyctor gave her a necklace ofthe rarest workmanship, and every one else brought her a beautifulpresent of some kind.Then the queen went back to her room upstairs, and her maids broughtthe presents after her. Meanwhile the suitors took to singing anddancing, and stayed till evening came. They danced and sang till itgrew dark; they then brought in three braziers151 to give light, andpiled them up with chopped firewood very old and dry, and they littorches from them, which the maids held up turn and turn about. ThenUlysses said:“Maids, servants of Ulysses who has so long been absent, go to thequeen inside the house; sit with her and amuse her, or spin, and pickwool. I will hold the light for all these people. They may stay tillmorning, but shall not beat me, for I can stand a great deal.”The maids looked at one another and laughed, while pretty Melanthobegan to gibe at him contemptuously. She was daughter to Dolius, buthad been brought up by Penelope, who used to give her toys to playwith, and looked after her when she was a child; but in spite of allthis she showed no consideration for the sorrows of her mistress, andused to misconduct herself with Eurymachus, with whom she was in love.“Poor wretch,” said she, “are you gone clean out of your mind? Go andsleep in some smithy, or place of public gossips, instead of chatteringhere. Are you not ashamed of opening your mouth before your betters—somany of them too? Has the wine been getting into your head, or do youalways babble in this way? You seem to have lost your wits because youbeat the tramp Irus; take care that a better man than he does not comeand cudgel you about the head till he pack you bleeding out of thehouse.”“Vixen,” replied Ulysses, scowling at her, “I will go and tellTelemachus what you have been saying, and he will have you torn limbfrom limb.”With these words he scared the women, and they went off into the bodyof the house. They trembled all over, for they thought he would do ashe said. But Ulysses took his stand near the burning braziers, holdingup torches and looking at the people—brooding the while on things thatshould surely come to pass.But Minerva would not let the suitors for one moment cease theirinsolence, for she wanted Ulysses to become even more bitter againstthem; she therefore set Eurymachus son of Polybus on to gibe at him,which made the others laugh. “Listen to me,” said he, “you suitors ofQueen Penelope, that I may speak even as I am minded. It is not fornothing that this man has come to the house of Ulysses; I believe thelight has not been coming from the torches, but from his own head—forhis hair is all gone, every bit of it.”Then turning to Ulysses he said, “Stranger, will you work as a servant,if I send you to the wolds and see that you are well paid? Can youbuild a stone fence, or plant trees? I will have you fed all the yearround, and will find you in shoes and clothing. Will you go, then? Notyou; for you have got into bad ways, and do not want to work; you hadrather fill your belly by going round the country begging.”“Eurymachus,” answered Ulysses, “if you and I were to work one againstthe other in early summer when the days are at their longest—give me agood scythe, and take another yourself, and let us see which will lastthe longer or mow the stronger, from dawn till dark when the mowinggrass is about. Or if you will plough against me, let us each take ayoke of tawny oxen, well-mated and of great strength and endurance:turn me into a four acre field, and see whether you or I can drive thestraighter furrow. If, again, war were to break out this day, give me ashield, a couple of spears and a helmet fitting well upon mytemples—you would find me foremost in the fray, and would cease yourgibes about my belly. You are insolent and cruel, and think yourself agreat man because you live in a little world, and that a bad one. IfUlysses comes to his own again, the doors of his house are wide, butyou will find them narrow when you try to fly through them.”Eurymachus was furious at all this. He scowled at him and cried, “Youwretch, I will soon pay you out for daring to say such things to me,and in public too. Has the wine been getting into your head or do youalways babble in this way? You seem to have lost your wits because youbeat the tramp Irus.” With this he caught hold of a footstool, butUlysses sought protection at the knees of Amphinomus of Dulichium, forhe was afraid. The stool hit the cupbearer on his right hand andknocked him down: the man fell with a cry flat on his back, and hiswine-jug fell ringing to the ground. The suitors in the coveredcloister were now in an uproar, and one would turn towards hisneighbour, saying, “I wish the stranger had gone somewhere else, badluck to him, for all the trouble he gives us. We cannot permit suchdisturbance about a beggar; if such ill counsels are to prevail weshall have no more pleasure at our banquet.”On this Telemachus came forward and said, “Sirs, are you mad? Can younot carry your meat and your liquor decently? Some evil spirit haspossessed you. I do not wish to drive any of you away, but you have hadyour suppers, and the sooner you all go home to bed the better.”The suitors bit their lips and marvelled at the boldness of his speech;but Amphinomus the son of Nisus, who was son to Aretias, said, “Do notlet us take offence; it is reasonable, so let us make no answer.Neither let us do violence to the stranger nor to any of Ulysses’servants. Let the cupbearer go round with the drink-offerings, that wemay make them and go home to our rest. As for the stranger, let usleave Telemachus to deal with him, for it is to his house that he hascome.”Thus did he speak, and his saying pleased them well, so Mulius ofDulichium, servant to Amphinomus, mixed them a bowl of wine and waterand handed it round to each of them man by man, whereon they made theirdrink-offerings to the blessed gods: Then, when they had made theirdrink-offerings and had drunk each one as he was minded, they tooktheir several ways each of them to his own abode.BOOK XIXTELEMACHUS AND ULYSSES REMOVE THE ARMOUR—ULYSSES INTERVIEWSPENELOPE—EURYCLEA WASHES HIS FEET AND RECOGNISES THE SCAR ON HISLEG—PENELOPE TELLS HER DREAM TO ULYSSES.Ulysses was left in the cloister, pondering on the means whereby withMinerva’s help he might be able to kill the suitors. Presently he saidto Telemachus, “Telemachus, we must get the armour together and take itdown inside. Make some excuse when the suitors ask you why you haveremoved it. Say that you have taken it to be out of the way of thesmoke, inasmuch as it is no longer what it was when Ulysses went away,but has become soiled and begrimed with soot. Add to this moreparticularly that you are afraid Jove may set them on to quarrel overtheir wine, and that they may do each other some harm which maydisgrace both banquet and wooing, for the sight of arms sometimestempts people to use them.”Telemachus approved of what his father had said, so he called nurseEuryclea and said, “Nurse, shut the women up in their room, while Itake the armour that my father left behind him down into the storeroom. No one looks after it now my father is gone, and it has got allsmirched with soot during my own boyhood. I want to take it down wherethe smoke cannot reach it.”“I wish, child,” answered Euryclea, “that you would take the managementof the house into your own hands altogether, and look after all theproperty yourself. But who is to go with you and light you to thestore-room? The maids would have done so, but you would not let them.”“The stranger,” said Telemachus, “shall show me a light; when peopleeat my bread they must earn it, no matter where they come from.”Euryclea did as she was told, and bolted the women inside their room.Then Ulysses and his son made all haste to take the helmets, shields,and spears inside; and Minerva went before them with a gold lamp in herhand that shed a soft and brilliant radiance, whereon Telemachus said,“Father, my eyes behold a great marvel: the walls, with the rafters,crossbeams, and the supports on which they rest are all aglow as with aflaming fire. Surely there is some god here who has come down fromheaven.”“Hush,” answered Ulysses, “hold your peace and ask no questions, forthis is the manner of the gods. Get you to your bed, and leave me hereto talk with your mother and the maids. Your mother in her grief willask me all sorts of questions.”On this Telemachus went by torch-light to the other side of the innercourt, to the room in which he always slept. There he lay in his bedtill morning, while Ulysses was left in the cloister pondering on themeans whereby with Minerva’s help he might be able to kill the suitors.Then Penelope came down from her room looking like Venus or Diana, andthey set her a seat inlaid with scrolls of silver and ivory near thefire in her accustomed place. It had been made by Icmalius and had afootstool all in one piece with the seat itself; and it was coveredwith a thick fleece: on this she now sat, and the maids came from thewomen’s room to join her. They set about removing the tables at whichthe wicked suitors had been dining, and took away the bread that wasleft, with the cups from which they had drunk. They emptied the embersout of the braziers, and heaped much wood upon them to give both lightand heat; but Melantho began to rail at Ulysses a second time and said,“Stranger, do you mean to plague us by hanging about the house allnight and spying upon the women? Be off, you wretch, outside, and eatyour supper there, or you shall be driven out with a firebrand.”Ulysses scowled at her and answered, “My good woman, why should you beso angry with me? Is it because I am not clean, and my clothes are allin rags, and because I am obliged to go begging about after the mannerof tramps and beggars generally? I too was a rich man once, and had afine house of my own; in those days I gave to many a tramp such as Inow am, no matter who he might be nor what he wanted. I had any numberof servants, and all the other things which people have who live welland are accounted wealthy, but it pleased Jove to take all away fromme; therefore, woman, beware lest you too come to lose that pride andplace in which you now wanton above your fellows; have a care lest youget out of favour with your mistress, and lest Ulysses should comehome, for there is still a chance that he may do so. Moreover, thoughhe be dead as you think he is, yet by Apollo’s will he has left a sonbehind him, Telemachus, who will note anything done amiss by the maidsin the house, for he is now no longer in his boyhood.”Penelope heard what he was saying and scolded the maid, “Impudentbaggage,” said she, “I see how abominably you are behaving, and youshall smart for it. You knew perfectly well, for I told you myself,that I was going to see the stranger and ask him about my husband, forwhose sake I am in such continual sorrow.”Then she said to her head waiting woman Eurynome, “Bring a seat with afleece upon it, for the stranger to sit upon while he tells his story,and listens to what I have to say. I wish to ask him some questions.”Eurynome brought the seat at once and set a fleece upon it, and as soonas Ulysses had sat down Penelope began by saying, “Stranger, I shallfirst ask you who and whence are you? Tell me of your town andparents.”“Madam,” answered Ulysses, “who on the face of the whole earth can dareto chide with you? Your fame reaches the firmament of heaven itself;you are like some blameless king, who upholds righteousness, as themonarch over a great and valiant nation: the earth yields its wheat andbarley, the trees are loaded with fruit, the ewes bring forth lambs,and the sea abounds with fish by reason of his virtues, and his peopledo good deeds under him. Nevertheless, as I sit here in your house, askme some other question and do not seek to know my race and family, oryou will recall memories that will yet more increase my sorrow. I amfull of heaviness, but I ought not to sit weeping and wailing inanother person’s house, nor is it well to be thus grieving continually.I shall have one of the servants or even yourself complaining of me,and saying that my eyes swim with tears because I am heavy with wine.”Then Penelope answered, “Stranger, heaven robbed me of all beauty,whether of face or figure, when the Argives set sail for Troy and mydear husband with them. If he were to return and look after my affairsI should be both more respected and should show a better presence tothe world. As it is, I am oppressed with care, and with the afflictionswhich heaven has seen fit to heap upon me. The chiefs from all ourislands—Dulichium, Same, and Zacynthus, as also from Ithaca itself, arewooing me against my will and are wasting my estate. I can thereforeshow no attention to strangers, nor suppliants, nor to people who saythat they are skilled artisans, but am all the time broken-heartedabout Ulysses. They want me to marry again at once, and I have toinvent stratagems in order to deceive them. In the first place heavenput it in my mind to set up a great tambour-frame in my room, and tobegin working upon an enormous piece of fine needlework. Then I said tothem, ‘Sweethearts, Ulysses is indeed dead, still, do not press me tomarry again immediately; wait—for I would not have my skill inneedlework perish unrecorded—till I have finished making a pall for thehero Laertes, to be ready against the time when death shall take him.He is very rich, and the women of the place will talk if he is laid outwithout a pall.’ This was what I said, and they assented; whereon Iused to keep working at my great web all day long, but at night I wouldunpick the stitches again by torch light. I fooled them in this way forthree years without their finding it out, but as time wore on and I wasnow in my fourth year, in the waning of moons, and many days had beenaccomplished, those good for nothing hussies my maids betrayed me tothe suitors, who broke in upon me and caught me; they were very angrywith me, so I was forced to finish my work whether I would or no. Andnow I do not see how I can find any further shift for getting out ofthis marriage. My parents are putting great pressure upon me, and myson chafes at the ravages the suitors are making upon his estate, forhe is now old enough to understand all about it and is perfectly ableto look after his own affairs, for heaven has blessed him with anexcellent disposition. Still, notwithstanding all this, tell me who youare and where you come from—for you must have had father and mother ofsome sort; you cannot be the son of an oak or of a rock.”Then Ulysses answered, “Madam, wife of Ulysses, since you persist inasking me about my family, I will answer, no matter what it costs me:people must expect to be pained when they have been exiles as long as Ihave, and suffered as much among as many peoples. Nevertheless, asregards your question I will tell you all you ask. There is a fair andfruitful island in mid-ocean called Crete; it is thickly peopled andthere are ninety cities in it: the people speak many differentlanguages which overlap one another, for there are Achaeans, braveEteocretans, Dorians of three-fold race, and noble Pelasgi. There is agreat town there, Cnossus, where Minos reigned who every nine years hada conference with Jove himself.152 Minos was father to Deucalion, whoseson I am, for Deucalion had two sons Idomeneus and myself. Idomeneussailed for Troy, and I, who am the younger, am called Aethon; mybrother, however, was at once the older and the more valiant of thetwo; hence it was in Crete that I saw Ulysses and showed himhospitality, for the winds took him there as he was on his way to Troy,carrying him out of his course from cape Malea and leaving him inAmnisus off the cave of Ilithuia, where the harbours are difficult toenter and he could hardly find shelter from the winds that were thenraging. As soon as he got there he went into the town and asked forIdomeneus, claiming to be his old and valued friend, but Idomeneus hadalready set sail for Troy some ten or twelve days earlier, so I tookhim to my own house and showed him every kind of hospitality, for I hadabundance of everything. Moreover, I fed the men who were with him withbarley meal from the public store, and got subscriptions of wine andoxen for them to sacrifice to their heart’s content. They stayed withme twelve days, for there was a gale blowing from the North so strongthat one could hardly keep one’s feet on land. I suppose someunfriendly god had raised it for them, but on the thirteenth day thewind dropped, and they got away.”Many a plausible tale did Ulysses further tell her, and Penelope weptas she listened, for her heart was melted. As the snow wastes upon themountain tops when the winds from South East and West have breathedupon it and thawed it till the rivers run bank full with water, even sodid her cheeks overflow with tears for the husband who was all the timesitting by her side. Ulysses felt for her and was sorry for her, but hekept his eyes as hard as horn or iron without letting them so much asquiver, so cunningly did he restrain his tears. Then, when she hadrelieved herself by weeping, she turned to him again and said: “Now,stranger, I shall put you to the test and see whether or no you reallydid entertain my husband and his men, as you say you did. Tell me,then, how he was dressed, what kind of a man he was to look at, and soalso with his companions.”“Madam,” answered Ulysses, “it is such a long time ago that I canhardly say. Twenty years are come and gone since he left my home, andwent elsewhither; but I will tell you as well as I can recollect.Ulysses wore a mantle of purple wool, double lined, and it was fastenedby a gold brooch with two catches for the pin. On the face of thisthere was a device that shewed a dog holding a spotted fawn between hisfore paws, and watching it as it lay panting upon the ground. Every onemarvelled at the way in which these things had been done in gold, thedog looking at the fawn, and strangling it, while the fawn wasstruggling convulsively to escape.153 As for the shirt that he worenext his skin, it was so soft that it fitted him like the skin of anonion, and glistened in the sunlight to the admiration of all the womenwho beheld it. Furthermore I say, and lay my saying to your heart, thatI do not know whether Ulysses wore these clothes when he left home, orwhether one of his companions had given them to him while he was on hisvoyage; or possibly some one at whose house he was staying made him apresent of them, for he was a man of many friends and had few equalsamong the Achaeans. I myself gave him a sword of bronze and a beautifulpurple mantle, double lined, with a shirt that went down to his feet,and I sent him on board his ship with every mark of honour. He had aservant with him, a little older than himself, and I can tell you whathe was like; his shoulders were hunched,154 he was dark, and he hadthick curly hair. His name was Eurybates, and Ulysses treated him withgreater familiarity than he did any of the others, as being the mostlike-minded with himself.”Penelope was moved still more deeply as she heard the indisputableproofs that Ulysses laid before her; and when she had again foundrelief in tears she said to him, “Stranger, I was already disposed topity you, but henceforth you shall be honoured and made welcome in myhouse. It was I who gave Ulysses the clothes you speak of. I took themout of the store room and folded them up myself, and I gave him alsothe gold brooch to wear as an ornament. Alas! I shall never welcome himhome again. It was by an ill fate that he ever set out for thatdetested city whose very name I cannot bring myself even to mention.”Then Ulysses answered, “Madam, wife of Ulysses, do not disfigureyourself further by grieving thus bitterly for your loss, though I canhardly blame you for doing so. A woman who has loved her husband andborne him children, would naturally be grieved at losing him, eventhough he were a worse man than Ulysses, who they say was like a god.Still, cease your tears and listen to what I can tell you. I will hidenothing from you, and can say with perfect truth that I have latelyheard of Ulysses as being alive and on his way home; he is among theThesprotians, and is bringing back much valuable treasure that he hasbegged from one and another of them; but his ship and all his crew werelost as they were leaving the Thrinacian island, for Jove and thesun-god were angry with him because his men had slaughtered thesun-god’s cattle, and they were all drowned to a man. But Ulysses stuckto the keel of the ship and was drifted on to the land of thePhaeacians, who are near of kin to the immortals, and who treated himas though he had been a god, giving him many presents, and wishing toescort him home safe and sound. In fact Ulysses would have been herelong ago, had he not thought better to go from land to land gatheringwealth; for there is no man living who is so wily as he is; there is noone can compare with him. Pheidon king of the Thesprotians told me allthis, and he swore to me—making drink-offerings in his house as he didso—that the ship was by the water side and the crew found who wouldtake Ulysses to his own country. He sent me off first, for therehappened to be a Thesprotian ship sailing for the wheat-growing islandof Dulichium, but he showed me all the treasure Ulysses had gottogether, and he had enough lying in the house of king Pheidon to keephis family for ten generations; but the king said Ulysses had gone toDodona that he might learn Jove’s mind from the high oak tree, and knowwhether after so long an absence he should return to Ithaca openly orin secret. So you may know he is safe and will be here shortly; he isclose at hand and cannot remain away from home much longer;nevertheless I will confirm my words with an oath, and call Jove who isthe first and mightiest of all gods to witness, as also that hearth ofUlysses to which I have now come, that all I have spoken shall surelycome to pass. Ulysses will return in this self same year; with the endof this moon and the beginning of the next he will be here.”“May it be even so,” answered Penelope; “if your words come true youshall have such gifts and such good will from me that all who see youshall congratulate you; but I know very well how it will be. Ulysseswill not return, neither will you get your escort hence, for so surelyas that Ulysses ever was, there are now no longer any such masters inthe house as he was, to receive honourable strangers or to further themon their way home. And now, you maids, wash his feet for him, and makehim a bed on a couch with rugs and blankets, that he may be warm andquiet till morning. Then, at day break wash him and anoint him again,that he may sit in the cloister and take his meals with Telemachus. Itshall be the worse for any one of these hateful people who is uncivilto him; like it or not, he shall have no more to do in this house. Forhow, sir, shall you be able to learn whether or no I am superior toothers of my sex both in goodness of heart and understanding, if I letyou dine in my cloisters squalid and ill clad? Men live but for alittle season; if they are hard, and deal hardly, people wish them illso long as they are alive, and speak contemptuously of them when theyare dead, but he that is righteous and deals righteously, the peopletell of his praise among all lands, and many shall call him blessed.”Ulysses answered, “Madam, I have foresworn rugs and blankets from theday that I left the snowy ranges of Crete to go on shipboard. I willlie as I have lain on many a sleepless night hitherto. Night afternight have I passed in any rough sleeping place, and waited formorning. Nor, again, do I like having my feet washed; I shall not letany of the young hussies about your house touch my feet; but, if youhave any old and respectable woman who has gone through as much troubleas I have, I will allow her to wash them.”To this Penelope said, “My dear sir, of all the guests who ever yetcame to my house there never was one who spoke in all things with suchadmirable propriety as you do. There happens to be in the house a mostrespectable old woman—the same who received my poor dear husband in herarms the night he was born, and nursed him in infancy. She is veryfeeble now, but she shall wash your feet.” “Come here,” said she,“Euryclea, and wash your master’s age-mate; I suppose Ulysses’ handsand feet are very much the same now as his are, for trouble ages all ofus dreadfully fast.”On these words the old woman covered her face with her hands; she beganto weep and made lamentation saying, “My dear child, I cannot thinkwhatever I am to do with you. I am certain no one was ever moregod-fearing than yourself, and yet Jove hates you. No one in the wholeworld ever burned him more thigh bones, nor gave him finer hecatombswhen you prayed you might come to a green old age yourself and see yourson grow up to take after you: yet see how he has prevented you alonefrom ever getting back to your own home. I have no doubt the women insome foreign palace which Ulysses has got to are gibing at him as allthese sluts here have been gibing at you. I do not wonder at your notchoosing to let them wash you after the manner in which they haveinsulted you; I will wash your feet myself gladly enough, as Penelopehas said that I am to do so; I will wash them both for Penelope’s sakeand for your own, for you have raised the most lively feelings ofcompassion in my mind; and let me say this moreover, which pray attendto; we have had all kinds of strangers in distress come here beforenow, but I make bold to say that no one ever yet came who was so likeUlysses in figure, voice, and feet as you are.”“Those who have seen us both,” answered Ulysses, “have always said wewere wonderfully like each other, and now you have noticed it too.”Then the old woman took the cauldron in which she was going to wash hisfeet, and poured plenty of cold water into it, adding hot till the bathwas warm enough. Ulysses sat by the fire, but ere long he turned awayfrom the light, for it occurred to him that when the old woman had holdof his leg she would recognise a certain scar which it bore, whereonthe whole truth would come out. And indeed as soon as she began washingher master, she at once knew the scar as one that had been given him bya wild boar when he was hunting on Mt. Parnassus with his excellentgrandfather Autolycus—who was the most accomplished thief and perjurerin the whole world—and with the sons of Autolycus. Mercury himself hadendowed him with this gift, for he used to burn the thigh bones ofgoats and kids to him, so he took pleasure in his companionship. Ithappened once that Autolycus had gone to Ithaca and had found the childof his daughter just born. As soon as he had done supper Euryclea setthe infant upon his knees and said, “Autolycus, you must find a namefor your grandson; you greatly wished that you might have one.”“Son-in-law and daughter,” replied Autolycus, “call the child thus: Iam highly displeased with a large number of people in one place andanother, both men and women; so name the child ‘Ulysses,’ or the childof anger. When he grows up and comes to visit his mother’s family onMt. Parnassus, where my possessions lie, I will make him a present andwill send him on his way rejoicing.”Ulysses, therefore, went to Parnassus to get the presents fromAutolycus, who with his sons shook hands with him and gave him welcome.His grandmother Amphithea threw her arms about him, and kissed hishead, and both his beautiful eyes, while Autolycus desired his sons toget dinner ready, and they did as he told them. They brought in a fiveyear old bull, flayed it, made it ready and divided it into joints;these they then cut carefully up into smaller pieces and spitted them;they roasted them sufficiently and served the portions round. Thusthrough the livelong day to the going down of the sun they feasted, andevery man had his full share so that all were satisfied; but when thesun set and it came on dark, they went to bed and enjoyed the boon ofsleep.When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, the sons ofAutolycus went out with their hounds hunting, and Ulysses went too.They climbed the wooded slopes of Parnassus and soon reached its breezyupland valleys; but as the sun was beginning to beat upon the fields,fresh-risen from the slow still currents of Oceanus, they came to amountain dell. The dogs were in front searching for the tracks of thebeast they were chasing, and after them came the sons of Autolycus,among whom was Ulysses, close behind the dogs, and he had a long spearin his hand. Here was the lair of a huge boar among some thickbrushwood, so dense that the wind and rain could not get through it,nor could the sun’s rays pierce it, and the ground underneath lay thickwith fallen leaves. The boar heard the noise of the men’s feet, and thehounds baying on every side as the huntsmen came up to him, so herushed from his lair, raised the bristles on his neck, and stood at baywith fire flashing from his eyes. Ulysses was the first to raise hisspear and try to drive it into the brute, but the boar was too quickfor him, and charged him sideways, ripping him above the knee with agash that tore deep though it did not reach the bone. As for the boar,Ulysses hit him on the right shoulder, and the point of the spear wentright through him, so that he fell groaning in the dust until the lifewent out of him. The sons of Autolycus busied themselves with thecarcass of the boar, and bound Ulysses’ wound; then, after saying aspell to stop the bleeding, they went home as fast as they could. Butwhen Autolycus and his sons had thoroughly healed Ulysses, they madehim some splendid presents, and sent him back to Ithaca with muchmutual good will. When he got back, his father and mother were rejoicedto see him, and asked him all about it, and how he had hurt himself toget the scar; so he told them how the boar had ripped him when he wasout hunting with Autolycus and his sons on Mt. Parnassus.As soon as Euryclea had got the scarred limb in her hands and had wellhold of it, she recognised it and dropped the foot at once. The legfell into the bath, which rang out and was overturned, so that all thewater was spilt on the ground; Euryclea’s eyes between her joy and hergrief filled with tears, and she could not speak, but she caughtUlysses by the beard and said, “My dear child, I am sure you must beUlysses himself, only I did not know you till I had actually touchedand handled you.”As she spoke she looked towards Penelope, as though wanting to tell herthat her dear husband was in the house, but Penelope was unable to lookin that direction and observe what was going on, for Minerva haddiverted her attention; so Ulysses caught Euryclea by the throat withhis right hand and with his left drew her close to him, and said,“Nurse, do you wish to be the ruin of me, you who nursed me at your ownbreast, now that after twenty years of wandering I am at last come tomy own home again? Since it has been borne in upon you by heaven torecognise me, hold your tongue, and do not say a word about it to anyone else in the house, for if you do I tell you—and it shall surelybe—that if heaven grants me to take the lives of these suitors, I willnot spare you, though you are my own nurse, when I am killing the otherwomen.”“My child,” answered Euryclea, “what are you talking about? You knowvery well that nothing can either bend or break me. I will hold mytongue like a stone or a piece of iron; furthermore let me say, and laymy saying to your heart, when heaven has delivered the suitors intoyour hand, I will give you a list of the women in the house who havebeen ill-behaved, and of those who are guiltless.”And Ulysses answered, “Nurse, you ought not to speak in that way; I amwell able to form my own opinion about one and all of them; hold yourtongue and leave everything to heaven.”As he said this Euryclea left the cloister to fetch some more water,for the first had been all spilt; and when she had washed him andanointed him with oil, Ulysses drew his seat nearer to the fire to warmhimself, and hid the scar under his rags. Then Penelope began talkingto him and said:“Stranger, I should like to speak with you briefly about anothermatter. It is indeed nearly bed time—for those, at least, who can sleepin spite of sorrow. As for myself, heaven has given me a life of suchunmeasurable woe, that even by day when I am attending to my duties andlooking after the servants, I am still weeping and lamenting during thewhole time; then, when night comes, and we all of us go to bed, I lieawake thinking, and my heart becomes a prey to the most incessant andcruel tortures. As the dun nightingale, daughter of Pandareus, sings inthe early spring from her seat in shadiest covert hid, and with many aplaintive trill pours out the tale how by mishap she killed her ownchild Itylus, son of king Zethus, even so does my mind toss and turn inits uncertainty whether I ought to stay with my son here, and safeguardmy substance, my bondsmen, and the greatness of my house, out of regardto public opinion and the memory of my late husband, or whether it isnot now time for me to go with the best of these suitors who are wooingme and making me such magnificent presents. As long as my son was stillyoung, and unable to understand, he would not hear of my leaving myhusband’s house, but now that he is full grown he begs and prays me todo so, being incensed at the way in which the suitors are eating up hisproperty. Listen, then, to a dream that I have had and interpret it forme if you can. I have twenty geese about the house that eat mash out ofa trough,155 and of which I am exceedingly fond. I dreamed that a greateagle came swooping down from a mountain, and dug his curved beak intothe neck of each of them till he had killed them all. Presently hesoared off into the sky, and left them lying dead about the yard;whereon I wept in my dream till all my maids gathered round me, sopiteously was I grieving because the eagle had killed my geese. Then hecame back again, and perching on a projecting rafter spoke to me withhuman voice, and told me to leave off crying. ‘Be of good courage,’ hesaid, ‘daughter of Icarius; this is no dream, but a vision of good omenthat shall surely come to pass. The geese are the suitors, and I am nolonger an eagle, but your own husband, who am come back to you, and whowill bring these suitors to a disgraceful end.’ On this I woke, andwhen I looked out I saw my geese at the trough eating their mash asusual.”“This dream, Madam,” replied Ulysses, “can admit but of oneinterpretation, for had not Ulysses himself told you how it shall befulfilled? The death of the suitors is portended, and not one singleone of them will escape.”And Penelope answered, “Stranger, dreams are very curious andunaccountable things, and they do not by any means invariably cometrue. There are two gates through which these unsubstantial fanciesproceed; the one is of horn, and the other ivory. Those that comethrough the gate of ivory are fatuous, but those from the gate of hornmean something to those that see them. I do not think, however, that myown dream came through the gate of horn, though I and my son should bemost thankful if it proves to have done so. Furthermore I say—and laymy saying to your heart—the coming dawn will usher in the ill-omenedday that is to sever me from the house of Ulysses, for I am about tohold a tournament of axes. My husband used to set up twelve axes in thecourt, one in front of the other, like the stays upon which a ship isbuilt; he would then go back from them and shoot an arrow through thewhole twelve. I shall make the suitors try to do the same thing, andwhichever of them can string the bow most easily, and send his arrowthrough all the twelve axes, him will I follow, and quit this house ofmy lawful husband, so goodly and so abounding in wealth. But even so, Idoubt not that I shall remember it in my dreams.”Then Ulysses answered, “Madam, wife of Ulysses, you need not defer yourtournament, for Ulysses will return ere ever they can string the bow,handle it how they will, and send their arrows through the iron.”To this Penelope said, “As long, sir, as you will sit here and talk tome, I can have no desire to go to bed. Still, people cannot dopermanently without sleep, and heaven has appointed us dwellers onearth a time for all things. I will therefore go upstairs and reclineupon that couch which I have never ceased to flood with my tears fromthe day Ulysses set out for the city with a hateful name.”She then went upstairs to her own room, not alone, but attended by hermaidens, and when there, she lamented her dear husband till Minervashed sweet sleep over her eyelids.BOOK XXULYSSES CANNOT SLEEP—PENELOPE’S PRAYER TO DIANA—THE TWO SIGNS FROMHEAVEN—EUMAEUS AND PHILOETIUS ARRIVE—THE SUITORS DINE—CTESIPPUS THROWSAN OX’S FOOT AT ULYSSES—THEOCLYMENUS FORETELLS DISASTER AND LEAVES THEHOUSE.Ulysses slept in the cloister upon an undressed bullock’s hide, on thetop of which he threw several skins of the sheep the suitors had eaten,and Eurynome156 threw a cloak over him after he had laid himself down.There, then, Ulysses lay wakefully brooding upon the way in which heshould kill the suitors; and by and by, the women who had been in thehabit of misconducting themselves with them, left the house gigglingand laughing with one another. This made Ulysses very angry, and hedoubted whether to get up and kill every single one of them then andthere, or to let them sleep one more and last time with the suitors.His heart growled within him, and as a bitch with puppies growls andshows her teeth when she sees a stranger, so did his heart growl withanger at the evil deeds that were being done: but he beat his breastand said, “Heart, be still, you had worse than this to bear on the daywhen the terrible Cyclops ate your brave companions; yet you bore it insilence till your cunning got you safe out of the cave, though you madesure of being killed.”Thus he chided with his heart, and checked it into endurance, but hetossed about as one who turns a paunch full of blood and fat in frontof a hot fire, doing it first on one side and then on the other, thathe may get it cooked as soon as possible, even so did he turn himselfabout from side to side, thinking all the time how, single handed as hewas, he should contrive to kill so large a body of men as the wickedsuitors. But by and by Minerva came down from heaven in the likeness ofa woman, and hovered over his head saying, “My poor unhappy man, why doyou lie awake in this way? This is your house: your wife is safe insideit, and so is your son who is just such a young man as any father maybe proud of.”“Goddess,” answered Ulysses, “all that you have said is true, but I amin some doubt as to how I shall be able to kill these wicked suitorssingle handed, seeing what a number of them there always are. And thereis this further difficulty, which is still more considerable. Supposingthat with Jove’s and your assistance I succeed in killing them, I mustask you to consider where I am to escape to from their avengers when itis all over.”“For shame,” replied Minerva, “why, any one else would trust a worseally than myself, even though that ally were only a mortal and lesswise than I am. Am I not a goddess, and have I not protected youthroughout in all your troubles? I tell you plainly that even thoughthere were fifty bands of men surrounding us and eager to kill us, youshould take all their sheep and cattle, and drive them away with you.But go to sleep; it is a very bad thing to lie awake all night, and youshall be out of your troubles before long.”As she spoke she shed sleep over his eyes, and then went back toOlympus.While Ulysses was thus yielding himself to a very deep slumber thateased the burden of his sorrows, his admirable wife awoke, and sittingup in her bed began to cry. When she had relieved herself by weepingshe prayed to Diana saying, “Great Goddess Diana, daughter of Jove,drive an arrow into my heart and slay me; or let some whirlwind snatchme up and bear me through paths of darkness till it drop me into themouths of over-flowing Oceanus, as it did the daughters of Pandareus.The daughters of Pandareus lost their father and mother, for the godskilled them, so they were left orphans. But Venus took care of them,and fed them on cheese, honey, and sweet wine. Juno taught them toexcel all women in beauty of form and understanding; Diana gave them animposing presence, and Minerva endowed them with every kind ofaccomplishment; but one day when Venus had gone up to Olympus to seeJove about getting them married (for well does he know both what shallhappen and what not happen to every one) the storm winds came andspirited them away to become handmaids to the dread Erinyes. Even so Iwish that the gods who live in heaven would hide me from mortal sight,or that fair Diana might strike me, for I would fain go even beneaththe sad earth if I might do so still looking towards Ulysses only, andwithout having to yield myself to a worse man than he was. Besides, nomatter how much people may grieve by day, they can put up with it solong as they can sleep at night, for when the eyes are closed inslumber people forget good and ill alike; whereas my misery haunts meeven in my dreams. This very night methought there was one lying by myside who was like Ulysses as he was when he went away with his host,and I rejoiced, for I believed that it was no dream, but the very truthitself.”On this the day broke, but Ulysses heard the sound of her weeping, andit puzzled him, for it seemed as though she already knew him and was byhis side. Then he gathered up the cloak and the fleeces on which he hadlain, and set them on a seat in the cloister, but he took the bullock’shide out into the open. He lifted up his hands to heaven, and prayed,saying “Father Jove, since you have seen fit to bring me over land andsea to my own home after all the afflictions you have laid upon me,give me a sign out of the mouth of some one or other of those who arenow waking within the house, and let me have another sign of some kindfrom outside.”Thus did he pray. Jove heard his prayer and forthwith thundered high upamong the clouds from the splendour of Olympus, and Ulysses was gladwhen he heard it. At the same time within the house, a miller-womanfrom hard by in the mill room lifted up her voice and gave him anothersign. There were twelve miller-women whose business it was to grindwheat and barley which are the staff of life. The others had groundtheir task and had gone to take their rest, but this one had not yetfinished, for she was not so strong as they were, and when she heardthe thunder she stopped grinding and gave the sign to her master.“Father Jove,” said she, “you, who rule over heaven and earth, you havethundered from a clear sky without so much as a cloud in it, and thismeans something for somebody; grant the prayer, then, of me your poorservant who calls upon you, and let this be the very last day that thesuitors dine in the house of Ulysses. They have worn me out with labourof grinding meal for them, and I hope they may never have anotherdinner anywhere at all.”Ulysses was glad when he heard the omens conveyed to him by the woman’sspeech, and by the thunder, for he knew they meant that he shouldavenge himself on the suitors.Then the other maids in the house rose and lit the fire on the hearth;Telemachus also rose and put on his clothes. He girded his sword abouthis shoulder, bound his sandals on to his comely feet, and took adoughty spear with a point of sharpened bronze; then he went to thethreshold of the cloister and said to Euryclea, “Nurse, did you makethe stranger comfortable both as regards bed and board, or did you lethim shift for himself?—for my mother, good woman though she is, has away of paying great attention to second-rate people, and of neglectingothers who are in reality much better men.”“Do not find fault child,” said Euryclea, “when there is no one to findfault with. The stranger sat and drank his wine as long as he liked:your mother did ask him if he would take any more bread and he said hewould not. When he wanted to go to bed she told the servants to makeone for him, but he said he was such a wretched outcast that he wouldnot sleep on a bed and under blankets; he insisted on having anundressed bullock’s hide and some sheepskins put for him in thecloister and I threw a cloak over him myself.”157Then Telemachus went out of the court to the place where the Achaeanswere meeting in assembly; he had his spear in his hand, and he was notalone, for his two dogs went with him. But Euryclea called the maidsand said, “Come, wake up; set about sweeping the cloisters andsprinkling them with water to lay the dust; put the covers on theseats; wipe down the tables, some of you, with a wet sponge; clean outthe mixing-jugs and the cups, and go for water from the fountain atonce; the suitors will be here directly; they will be here early, forit is a feast day.”Thus did she speak, and they did even as she had said: twenty of themwent to the fountain for water, and the others set themselves busily towork about the house. The men who were in attendance on the suitorsalso came up and began chopping firewood. By and by the women returnedfrom the fountain, and the swineherd came after them with the threebest pigs he could pick out. These he let feed about the premises, andthen he said good-humouredly to Ulysses, “Stranger, are the suitorstreating you any better now, or are they as insolent as ever?”“May heaven,” answered Ulysses, “requite to them the wickedness withwhich they deal high-handedly in another man’s house without any senseof shame.”Thus did they converse; meanwhile Melanthius the goatherd came up, forhe too was bringing in his best goats for the suitors’ dinner; and hehad two shepherds with him. They tied the goats up under the gatehouse,and then Melanthius began gibing at Ulysses. “Are you still here,stranger,” said he, “to pester people by begging about the house? Whycan you not go elsewhere? You and I shall not come to an understandingbefore we have given each other a taste of our fists. You beg withoutany sense of decency: are there not feasts elsewhere among theAchaeans, as well as here?”Ulysses made no answer, but bowed his head and brooded. Then a thirdman, Philoetius, joined them, who was bringing in a barren heifer andsome goats. These were brought over by the boatmen who are there totake people over when any one comes to them. So Philoetius made hisheifer and his goats secure under the gatehouse, and then went up tothe swineherd. “Who, Swineherd,” said he, “is this stranger that islately come here? Is he one of your men? What is his family? Where doeshe come from? Poor fellow, he looks as if he had been some great man,but the gods give sorrow to whom they will—even to kings if it sopleases them.”As he spoke he went up to Ulysses and saluted him with his right hand;“Good day to you, father stranger,” said he, “you seem to be verypoorly off now, but I hope you will have better times by and by. FatherJove, of all gods you are the most malicious. We are your own children,yet you show us no mercy in all our misery and afflictions. A sweatcame over me when I saw this man, and my eyes filled with tears, for hereminds me of Ulysses, who I fear is going about in just such rags asthis man’s are, if indeed he is still among the living. If he isalready dead and in the house of Hades, then, alas! for my good master,who made me his stockman when I was quite young among theCephallenians, and now his cattle are countless; no one could have donebetter with them than I have, for they have bred like ears of corn;nevertheless I have to keep bringing them in for others to eat, whotake no heed to his son though he is in the house, and fear not thewrath of heaven, but are already eager to divide Ulysses’ propertyamong them because he has been away so long. I have often thought—onlyit would not be right while his son is living—of going off with thecattle to some foreign country; bad as this would be, it is stillharder to stay here and be ill-treated about other people’s herds. Myposition is intolerable, and I should long since have run away and putmyself under the protection of some other chief, only that I believe mypoor master will yet return, and send all these suitors flying out ofthe house.”“Stockman,” answered Ulysses, “you seem to be a very well-disposedperson, and I can see that you are a man of sense. Therefore I willtell you, and will confirm my words with an oath. By Jove, the chief ofall gods, and by that hearth of Ulysses to which I am now come, Ulyssesshall return before you leave this place, and if you are so minded youshall see him killing the suitors who are now masters here.”“If Jove were to bring this to pass,” replied the stockman, “you shouldsee how I would do my very utmost to help him.”And in like manner Eumaeus prayed that Ulysses might return home.Thus did they converse. Meanwhile the suitors were hatching a plot tomurder Telemachus: but a bird flew near them on their left hand—aneagle with a dove in its talons. On this Amphinomus said, “My friends,this plot of ours to murder Telemachus will not succeed; let us go todinner instead.”The others assented, so they went inside and laid their cloaks on thebenches and seats. They sacrificed the sheep, goats, pigs, and theheifer, and when the inward meats were cooked they served them round.They mixed the wine in the mixing-bowls, and the swineherd gave everyman his cup, while Philoetius handed round the bread in the breadbaskets, and Melanthius poured them out their wine. Then they laidtheir hands upon the good things that were before them.Telemachus purposely made Ulysses sit in the part of the cloister thatwas paved with stone;158 he gave him a shabby looking seat at a littletable to himself, and had his portion of the inward meats brought tohim, with his wine in a gold cup. “Sit there,” said he, “and drink yourwine among the great people. I will put a stop to the gibes and blowsof the suitors, for this is no public house, but belongs to Ulysses,and has passed from him to me. Therefore, suitors, keep your hands andyour tongues to yourselves, or there will be mischief.”The suitors bit their lips, and marvelled at the boldness of hisspeech; then Antinous said, “We do not like such language but we willput up with it, for Telemachus is threatening us in good earnest. IfJove had let us we should have put a stop to his brave talk ere now.”Thus spoke Antinous, but Telemachus heeded him not. Meanwhile theheralds were bringing the holy hecatomb through the city, and theAchaeans gathered under the shady grove of Apollo.Then they roasted the outer meat, drew it off the spits, gave every manhis portion, and feasted to their heart’s content; those who waited attable gave Ulysses exactly the same portion as the others had, forTelemachus had told them to do so.But Minerva would not let the suitors for one moment drop theirinsolence, for she wanted Ulysses to become still more bitter againstthem. Now there happened to be among them a ribald fellow, whose namewas Ctesippus, and who came from Same. This man, confident in his greatwealth, was paying court to the wife of Ulysses, and said to thesuitors, “Hear what I have to say. The stranger has already had aslarge a portion as any one else; this is well, for it is not right norreasonable to ill-treat any guest of Telemachus who comes here. I will,however, make him a present on my own account, that he may havesomething to give to the bath-woman, or to some other of Ulysses’servants.”As he spoke he picked up a heifer’s foot from the meat-basket in whichit lay, and threw it at Ulysses, but Ulysses turned his head a littleaside, and avoided it, smiling grimly Sardinian fashion159 as he didso, and it hit the wall, not him. On this Telemachus spoke fiercely toCtesippus, “It is a good thing for you,” said he, “that the strangerturned his head so that you missed him. If you had hit him I shouldhave run you through with my spear, and your father would have had tosee about getting you buried rather than married in this house. So letme have no more unseemly behaviour from any of you, for I am grown upnow to the knowledge of good and evil and understand what is going on,instead of being the child that I have been heretofore. I have longseen you killing my sheep and making free with my corn and wine: I haveput up with this, for one man is no match for many, but do me nofurther violence. Still, if you wish to kill me, kill me; I would farrather die than see such disgraceful scenes day after day—guestsinsulted, and men dragging the women servants about the house in anunseemly way.”They all held their peace till at last Agelaus son of Damastor said,“No one should take offence at what has just been said, nor gainsay it,for it is quite reasonable. Leave off, therefore, ill-treating thestranger, or any one else of the servants who are about the house; Iwould say, however, a friendly word to Telemachus and his mother, whichI trust may commend itself to both. ‘As long,’ I would say, ‘as you hadground for hoping that Ulysses would one day come home, no one couldcomplain of your waiting and suffering160 the suitors to be in yourhouse. It would have been better that he should have returned, but itis now sufficiently clear that he will never do so; therefore talk allthis quietly over with your mother, and tell her to marry the best man,and the one who makes her the most advantageous offer. Thus you willyourself be able to manage your own inheritance, and to eat and drinkin peace, while your mother will look after some other man’s house, notyours.’”To this Telemachus answered, “By Jove, Agelaus, and by the sorrows ofmy unhappy father, who has either perished far from Ithaca, or iswandering in some distant land, I throw no obstacles in the way of mymother’s marriage; on the contrary I urge her to choose whomsoever shewill, and I will give her numberless gifts into the bargain, but I darenot insist point blank that she shall leave the house against her ownwishes. Heaven forbid that I should do this.”Minerva now made the suitors fall to laughing immoderately, and settheir wits wandering; but they were laughing with a forced laughter.Their meat became smeared with blood; their eyes filled with tears, andtheir hearts were heavy with forebodings. Theoclymenus saw this andsaid, “Unhappy men, what is it that ails you? There is a shroud ofdarkness drawn over you from head to foot, your cheeks are wet withtears; the air is alive with wailing voices; the walls and roof-beamsdrip blood; the gate of the cloisters and the court beyond them arefull of ghosts trooping down into the night of hell; the sun is blottedout of heaven, and a blighting gloom is over all the land.”Thus did he speak, and they all of them laughed heartily. Eurymachusthen said, “This stranger who has lately come here has lost his senses.Servants, turn him out into the streets, since he finds it so darkhere.”But Theoclymenus said, “Eurymachus, you need not send any one with me.I have eyes, ears, and a pair of feet of my own, to say nothing of anunderstanding mind. I will take these out of the house with me, for Isee mischief overhanging you, from which not one of you men who areinsulting people and plotting ill deeds in the house of Ulysses will beable to escape.”He left the house as he spoke, and went back to Piraeus who gave himwelcome, but the suitors kept looking at one another and provokingTelemachus by laughing at the strangers. One insolent fellow said tohim, “Telemachus, you are not happy in your guests; first you have thisimportunate tramp, who comes begging bread and wine and has no skillfor work or for hard fighting, but is perfectly useless, and now hereis another fellow who is setting himself up as a prophet. Let mepersuade you, for it will be much better to put them on board ship andsend them off to the Sicels to sell for what they will bring.”Telemachus gave him no heed, but sate silently watching his father,expecting every moment that he would begin his attack upon the suitors.Meanwhile the daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, had had a rich seatplaced for her facing the court and cloisters, so that she could hearwhat every one was saying. The dinner indeed had been prepared amidmuch merriment; it had been both good and abundant, for they hadsacrificed many victims; but the supper was yet to come, and nothingcan be conceived more gruesome than the meal which a goddess and abrave man were soon to lay before them—for they had brought their doomupon themselves.BOOK XXITHE TRIAL OF THE AXES, DURING WHICH ULYSSES REVEALS HIMSELF TO EUMAEUSAND PHILOETIUSMinerva now put it in Penelope’s mind to make the suitors try theirskill with the bow and with the iron axes, in contest among themselves,as a means of bringing about their destruction. She went upstairs andgot the store-room key, which was made of bronze and had a handle ofivory; she then went with her maidens into the store-room at the end ofthe house, where her husband’s treasures of gold, bronze, and wroughtiron were kept, and where was also his bow, and the quiver full ofdeadly arrows that had been given him by a friend whom he had met inLacedaemon—Iphitus the son of Eurytus. The two fell in with one anotherin Messene at the house of Ortilochus, where Ulysses was staying inorder to recover a debt that was owing from the whole people; for theMessenians had carried off three hundred sheep from Ithaca, and hadsailed away with them and with their shepherds. In quest of theseUlysses took a long journey while still quite young, for his father andthe other chieftains sent him on a mission to recover them. Iphitus hadgone there also to try and get back twelve brood mares that he hadlost, and the mule foals that were running with them. These mares werethe death of him in the end, for when he went to the house of Jove’sson, mighty Hercules, who performed such prodigies of valour, Herculesto his shame killed him, though he was his guest, for he feared notheaven’s vengeance, nor yet respected his own table which he had setbefore Iphitus, but killed him in spite of everything, and kept themares himself. It was when claiming these that Iphitus met Ulysses, andgave him the bow which mighty Eurytus had been used to carry, and whichon his death had been left by him to his son. Ulysses gave him inreturn a sword and a spear, and this was the beginning of a fastfriendship, although they never visited at one another’s houses, forJove’s son Hercules killed Iphitus ere they could do so. This bow,then, given him by Iphitus, had not been taken with him by Ulysses whenhe sailed for Troy; he had used it so long as he had been at home, buthad left it behind as having been a keepsake from a valued friend.Penelope presently reached the oak threshold of the store-room; thecarpenter had planed this duly, and had drawn a line on it so as to getit quite straight; he had then set the door posts into it and hung thedoors. She loosed the strap from the handle of the door, put in thekey, and drove it straight home to shoot back the bolts that held thedoors;161 these flew open with a noise like a bull bellowing in ameadow, and Penelope stepped upon the raised platform, where the chestsstood in which the fair linen and clothes were laid by along withfragrant herbs: reaching thence, she took down the bow with its bowcase from the peg on which it hung. She sat down with it on her knees,weeping bitterly as she took the bow out of its case, and when hertears had relieved her, she went to the cloister where the suitorswere, carrying the bow and the quiver, with the many deadly arrows thatwere inside it. Along with her came her maidens, bearing a chest thatcontained much iron and bronze which her husband had won as prizes.When she reached the suitors, she stood by one of the bearing-postssupporting the roof of the cloister, holding a veil before her face,and with a maid on either side of her. Then she said:“Listen to me you suitors, who persist in abusing the hospitality ofthis house because its owner has been long absent, and without otherpretext than that you want to marry me; this, then, being the prizethat you are contending for, I will bring out the mighty bow ofUlysses, and whomsoever of you shall string it most easily and send hisarrow through each one of twelve axes, him will I follow and quit thishouse of my lawful husband, so goodly, and so abounding in wealth. Buteven so I doubt not that I shall remember it in my dreams.”As she spoke, she told Eumaeus to set the bow and the pieces of ironbefore the suitors, and Eumaeus wept as he took them to do as she hadbidden him. Hard by, the stockman wept also when he saw his master’sbow, but Antinous scolded them. “You country louts,” said he, “sillysimpletons; why should you add to the sorrows of your mistress bycrying in this way? She has enough to grieve her in the loss of herhusband; sit still, therefore, and eat your dinners in silence, or gooutside if you want to cry, and leave the bow behind you. We suitorsshall have to contend for it with might and main, for we shall find itno light matter to string such a bow as this is. There is not a man ofus all who is such another as Ulysses; for I have seen him and rememberhim, though I was then only a child.”This was what he said, but all the time he was expecting to be able tostring the bow and shoot through the iron, whereas in fact he was to bethe first that should taste of the arrows from the hands of Ulysses,whom he was dishonouring in his own house—egging the others on to do soalso.Then Telemachus spoke. “Great heavens!” he exclaimed, “Jove must haverobbed me of my senses. Here is my dear and excellent mother saying shewill quit this house and marry again, yet I am laughing and enjoyingmyself as though there were nothing happening. But, suitors, as thecontest has been agreed upon, let it go forward. It is for a womanwhose peer is not to be found in Pylos, Argos, or Mycene, nor yet inIthaca nor on the mainland. You know this as well as I do; what needhave I to speak in praise of my mother? Come on, then, make no excusesfor delay, but let us see whether you can string the bow or no. I toowill make trial of it, for if I can string it and shoot through theiron, I shall not suffer my mother to quit this house with a stranger,not if I can win the prizes which my father won before me.”As he spoke he sprang from his seat, threw his crimson cloak from him,and took his sword from his shoulder. First he set the axes in a row,in a long groove which he had dug for them, and had made straight byline.162 Then he stamped the earth tight round them, and everyone wassurprised when they saw him set them up so orderly, though he had neverseen anything of the kind before. This done, he went on to the pavementto make trial of the bow; thrice did he tug at it, trying with all hismight to draw the string, and thrice he had to leave off, though he hadhoped to string the bow and shoot through the iron. He was trying forthe fourth time, and would have strung it had not Ulysses made a signto check him in spite of all his eagerness. So he said:“Alas! I shall either be always feeble and of no prowess, or I am tooyoung, and have not yet reached my full strength so as to be able tohold my own if any one attacks me. You others, therefore, who arestronger than I, make trial of the bow and get this contest settled.”On this he put the bow down, letting it lean against the door [that ledinto the house] with the arrow standing against the top of the bow.Then he sat down on the seat from which he had risen, and Antinoussaid:“Come on each of you in his turn, going towards the right from theplace at which the cupbearer begins when he is handing round the wine.”The rest agreed, and Leiodes son of Oenops was the first to rise. Hewas sacrificial priest to the suitors, and sat in the corner near themixing-bowl. 163 He was the only man who hated their evil deeds and wasindignant with the others. He was now the first to take the bow andarrow, so he went on to the pavement to make his trial, but he couldnot string the bow, for his hands were weak and unused to hard work,they therefore soon grew tired, and he said to the suitors, “Myfriends, I cannot string it; let another have it, this bow shall takethe life and soul out of many a chief among us, for it is better to diethan to live after having missed the prize that we have so long strivenfor, and which has brought us so long together. Some one of us is evennow hoping and praying that he may marry Penelope, but when he has seenthis bow and tried it, let him woo and make bridal offerings to someother woman, and let Penelope marry whoever makes her the best offerand whose lot it is to win her.”On this he put the bow down, letting it lean against the door,164 withthe arrow standing against the tip of the bow. Then he took his seatagain on the seat from which he had risen; and Antinous rebuked himsaying:“Leiodes, what are you talking about? Your words are monstrous andintolerable; it makes me angry to listen to you. Shall, then, this bowtake the life of many a chief among us, merely because you cannot bendit yourself? True, you were not born to be an archer, but there areothers who will soon string it.”Then he said to Melanthius the goatherd, “Look sharp, light a fire inthe court, and set a seat hard by with a sheep skin on it; bring usalso a large ball of lard, from what they have in the house. Let uswarm the bow and grease it—we will then make trial of it again, andbring the contest to an end.”Melanthius lit the fire, and set a seat covered with sheep skins besideit. He also brought a great ball of lard from what they had in thehouse, and the suitors warmed the bow and again made trial of it, butthey were none of them nearly strong enough to string it. Neverthelessthere still remained Antinous and Eurymachus, who were the ringleadersamong the suitors and much the foremost among them all.Then the swineherd and the stockman left the cloisters together, andUlysses followed them. When they had got outside the gates and theouter yard, Ulysses said to them quietly:“Stockman, and you swineherd, I have something in my mind which I am indoubt whether to say or no; but I think I will say it. What manner ofmen would you be to stand by Ulysses, if some god should bring him backhere all of a sudden? Say which you are disposed to do—to side with thesuitors, or with Ulysses?”“Father Jove,” answered the stockman, “would indeed that you might soordain it. If some god were but to bring Ulysses back, you should seewith what might and main I would fight for him.”In like words Eumaeus prayed to all the gods that Ulysses might return;when, therefore, he saw for certain what mind they were of, Ulyssessaid, “It is I, Ulysses, who am here. I have suffered much, but atlast, in the twentieth year, I am come back to my own country. I findthat you two alone of all my servants are glad that I should do so, forI have not heard any of the others praying for my return. To you two,therefore, will I unfold the truth as it shall be. If heaven shalldeliver the suitors into my hands, I will find wives for both of you,will give you house and holding close to my own, and you shall be to meas though you were brothers and friends of Telemachus. I will now giveyou convincing proofs that you may know me and be assured. See, here isthe scar from the boar’s tooth that ripped me when I was out hunting onMt. Parnassus with the sons of Autolycus.”As he spoke he drew his rags aside from the great scar, and when theyhad examined it thoroughly, they both of them wept about Ulysses, threwtheir arms round him, and kissed his head and shoulders, while Ulysseskissed their hands and faces in return. The sun would have gone downupon their mourning if Ulysses had not checked them and said:“Cease your weeping, lest some one should come outside and see us, andtell those who are within. When you go in, do so separately, not bothtogether; I will go first, and do you follow afterwards; let thismoreover be the token between us; the suitors will all of them try toprevent me from getting hold of the bow and quiver; do you, therefore,Eumaeus, place it in my hands when you are carrying it about, and tellthe women to close the doors of their apartment. If they hear anygroaning or uproar as of men fighting about the house, they must notcome out; they must keep quiet, and stay where they are at their work.And I charge you, Philoetius, to make fast the doors of the outercourt, and to bind them securely at once.”When he had thus spoken, he went back to the house and took the seatthat he had left. Presently, his two servants followed him inside.At this moment the bow was in the hands of Eurymachus, who was warmingit by the fire, but even so he could not string it, and he was greatlygrieved. He heaved a deep sigh and said, “I grieve for myself and forus all; I grieve that I shall have to forgo the marriage, but I do notcare nearly so much about this, for there are plenty of other women inIthaca and elsewhere; what I feel most is the fact of our being soinferior to Ulysses in strength that we cannot string his bow. Thiswill disgrace us in the eyes of those who are yet unborn.”“It shall not be so, Eurymachus,” said Antinous, “and you know ityourself. Today is the feast of Apollo throughout all the land; who canstring a bow on such a day as this? Put it on one side—as for the axesthey can stay where they are, for no one is likely to come to the houseand take them away: let the cupbearer go round with his cups, that wemay make our drink-offerings and drop this matter of the bow; we willtell Melanthius to bring us in some goats tomorrow—the best he has; wecan then offer thigh bones to Apollo the mighty archer, and again maketrial of the bow, so as to bring the contest to an end.”The rest approved his words, and thereon men servants poured water overthe hands of the guests, while pages filled the mixing-bowls with wineand water and handed it round after giving every man hisdrink-offering. Then, when they had made their offerings and had drunkeach as much as he desired, Ulysses craftily said:—“Suitors of the illustrious queen, listen that I may speak even as I amminded. I appeal more especially to Eurymachus, and to Antinous who hasjust spoken with so much reason. Cease shooting for the present andleave the matter to the gods, but in the morning let heaven givevictory to whom it will. For the moment, however, give me the bow thatI may prove the power of my hands among you all, and see whether Istill have as much strength as I used to have, or whether travel andneglect have made an end of it.”This made them all very angry, for they feared he might string the bow,Antinous therefore rebuked him fiercely saying, “Wretched creature, youhave not so much as a grain of sense in your whole body; you ought tothink yourself lucky in being allowed to dine unharmed among yourbetters, without having any smaller portion served you than we othershave had, and in being allowed to hear our conversation. No otherbeggar or stranger has been allowed to hear what we say amongourselves; the wine must have been doing you a mischief, as it doeswith all those who drink immoderately. It was wine that inflamed theCentaur Eurytion when he was staying with Peirithous among theLapithae. When the wine had got into his head, he went mad and did illdeeds about the house of Peirithous; this angered the heroes who werethere assembled, so they rushed at him and cut off his ears andnostrils; then they dragged him through the doorway out of the house,so he went away crazed, and bore the burden of his crime, bereft ofunderstanding. Henceforth, therefore, there was war between mankind andthe centaurs, but he brought it upon himself through his owndrunkenness. In like manner I can tell you that it will go hardly withyou if you string the bow: you will find no mercy from any one here,for we shall at once ship you off to king Echetus, who kills every onethat comes near him: you will never get away alive, so drink and keepquiet without getting into a quarrel with men younger than yourself.”Penelope then spoke to him. “Antinous,” said she, “it is not right thatyou should ill-treat any guest of Telemachus who comes to this house.If the stranger should prove strong enough to string the mighty bow ofUlysses, can you suppose that he would take me home with him and makeme his wife? Even the man himself can have no such idea in his mind:none of you need let that disturb his feasting; it would be out of allreason.”“Queen Penelope,” answered Eurymachus, “we do not suppose that this manwill take you away with him; it is impossible; but we are afraid lestsome of the baser sort, men or women among the Achaeans, should gogossiping about and say, ‘These suitors are a feeble folk; they arepaying court to the wife of a brave man whose bow not one of them wasable to string, and yet a beggarly tramp who came to the house strungit at once and sent an arrow through the iron.’ This is what will besaid, and it will be a scandal against us.”“Eurymachus,” Penelope answered, “people who persist in eating up theestate of a great chieftain and dishonouring his house must not expectothers to think well of them. Why then should you mind if men talk asyou think they will? This stranger is strong and well-built, he saysmoreover that he is of noble birth. Give him the bow, and let us seewhether he can string it or no. I say—and it shall surely be—that ifApollo vouchsafes him the glory of stringing it, I will give him acloak and shirt of good wear, with a javelin to keep off dogs androbbers, and a sharp sword. I will also give him sandals, and will seehim sent safely wherever he wants to go.”Then Telemachus said, “Mother, I am the only man either in Ithaca or inthe islands that are over against Elis who has the right to let any onehave the bow or to refuse it. No one shall force me one way or theother, not even though I choose to make the stranger a present of thebow outright, and let him take it away with him. Go, then, within thehouse and busy yourself with your daily duties, your loom, yourdistaff, and the ordering of your servants. This bow is a man’s matter,and mine above all others, for it is I who am master here.”She went wondering back into the house, and laid her son’s saying inher heart. Then going upstairs with her handmaids into her room, shemourned her dear husband till Minerva sent sweet sleep over hereyelids.The swineherd now took up the bow and was for taking it to Ulysses, butthe suitors clamoured at him from all parts of the cloisters, and oneof them said, “You idiot, where are you taking the bow to? Are you outof your wits? If Apollo and the other gods will grant our prayer, yourown boarhounds shall get you into some quiet little place, and worryyou to death.”Eumaeus was frightened at the outcry they all raised, so he put the bowdown then and there, but Telemachus shouted out at him from the otherside of the cloisters, and threatened him saying, “Father Eumaeus,bring the bow on in spite of them, or young as I am I will pelt youwith stones back to the country, for I am the better man of the two. Iwish I was as much stronger than all the other suitors in the house asI am than you, I would soon send some of them off sick and sorry, forthey mean mischief.”Thus did he speak, and they all of them laughed heartily, which putthem in a better humour with Telemachus; so Eumaeus brought the bow onand placed it in the hands of Ulysses. When he had done this, he calledEuryclea apart and said to her, “Euryclea, Telemachus says you are toclose the doors of the women’s apartments. If they hear any groaning oruproar as of men fighting about the house, they are not to come out,but are to keep quiet and stay where they are at their work.”Euryclea did as she was told and closed the doors of the women’sapartments.Meanwhile Philoetius slipped quietly out and made fast the gates of theouter court. There was a ship’s cable of byblus fibre lying in thegatehouse, so he made the gates fast with it and then came in again,resuming the seat that he had left, and keeping an eye on Ulysses, whohad now got the bow in his hands, and was turning it every way about,and proving it all over to see whether the worms had been eating intoits two horns during his absence. Then would one turn towards hisneighbour saying, “This is some tricky old bow-fancier; either he hasgot one like it at home, or he wants to make one, in such workmanlikestyle does the old vagabond handle it.”Another said, “I hope he may be no more successful in other things thanhe is likely to be in stringing this bow.”But Ulysses, when he had taken it up and examined it all over, strungit as easily as a skilled bard strings a new peg of his lyre and makesthe twisted gut fast at both ends. Then he took it in his right hand toprove the string, and it sang sweetly under his touch like thetwittering of a swallow. The suitors were dismayed, and turned colouras they heard it; at that moment, moreover, Jove thundered loudly as asign, and the heart of Ulysses rejoiced as he heard the omen that theson of scheming Saturn had sent him.He took an arrow that was lying upon the table165—for those which theAchaeans were so shortly about to taste were all inside the quiver—helaid it on the centre-piece of the bow, and drew the notch of the arrowand the string toward him, still seated on his seat. When he had takenaim he let fly, and his arrow pierced every one of the handle-holes ofthe axes from the first onwards till it had gone right through them,and into the outer courtyard. Then he said to Telemachus:“Your guest has not disgraced you, Telemachus. I did not miss what Iaimed at, and I was not long in stringing my bow. I am still strong,and not as the suitors twit me with being. Now, however, it is time forthe Achaeans to prepare supper while there is still daylight, and thenotherwise to disport themselves with song and dance which are thecrowning ornaments of a banquet.”As he spoke he made a sign with his eyebrows, and Telemachus girded onhis sword, grasped his spear, and stood armed beside his father’s seat.BOOK XXIITHE KILLING OF THE SUITORS—THE MAIDS WHO HAVE MISCONDUCTED THEMSELVESARE MADE TO CLEANSE THE CLOISTERS AND ARE THEN HANGED.Then Ulysses tore off his rags, and sprang on to the broad pavementwith his bow and his quiver full of arrows. He shed the arrows on tothe ground at his feet and said, “The mighty contest is at an end. Iwill now see whether Apollo will vouchsafe it to me to hit another markwhich no man has yet hit.”On this he aimed a deadly arrow at Antinous, who was about to take up atwo-handled gold cup to drink his wine and already had it in his hands.He had no thought of death—who amongst all the revellers would thinkthat one man, however brave, would stand alone among so many and killhim? The arrow struck Antinous in the throat, and the point went cleanthrough his neck, so that he fell over and the cup dropped from hishand, while a thick stream of blood gushed from his nostrils. He kickedthe table from him and upset the things on it, so that the bread androasted meats were all soiled as they fell over on to the ground.166The suitors were in an uproar when they saw that a man had been hit;they sprang in dismay one and all of them from their seats and lookedeverywhere towards the walls, but there was neither shield nor spear,and they rebuked Ulysses very angrily. “Stranger,” said they, “youshall pay for shooting people in this way: you shall see no othercontest; you are a doomed man; he whom you have slain was the foremostyouth in Ithaca, and the vultures shall devour you for having killedhim.”Thus they spoke, for they thought that he had killed Antinous bymistake, and did not perceive that death was hanging over the head ofevery one of them. But Ulysses glared at them and said:“Dogs, did you think that I should not come back from Troy? You havewasted my substance,167 have forced my women servants to lie with you,and have wooed my wife while I was still living. You have fearedneither God nor man, and now you shall die.”They turned pale with fear as he spoke, and every man looked roundabout to see whither he might fly for safety, but Eurymachus alonespoke.“If you are Ulysses,” said he, “then what you have said is just. Wehave done much wrong on your lands and in your house. But Antinous whowas the head and front of the offending lies low already. It was allhis doing. It was not that he wanted to marry Penelope; he did not somuch care about that; what he wanted was something quite different, andJove has not vouchsafed it to him; he wanted to kill your son and to bechief man in Ithaca. Now, therefore, that he has met the death whichwas his due, spare the lives of your people. We will make everythinggood among ourselves, and pay you in full for all that we have eatenand drunk. Each one of us shall pay you a fine worth twenty oxen, andwe will keep on giving you gold and bronze till your heart is softened.Until we have done this no one can complain of your being enragedagainst us.”Ulysses again glared at him and said, “Though you should give me allthat you have in the world both now and all that you ever shall have, Iwill not stay my hand till I have paid all of you in full. You mustfight, or fly for your lives; and fly, not a man of you shall.”Their hearts sank as they heard him, but Eurymachus again spoke saying:“My friends, this man will give us no quarter. He will stand where heis and shoot us down till he has killed every man among us. Let us thenshow fight; draw your swords, and hold up the tables to shield you fromhis arrows. Let us have at him with a rush, to drive him from thepavement and doorway: we can then get through into the town, and raisesuch an alarm as shall soon stay his shooting.”As he spoke he drew his keen blade of bronze, sharpened on both sides,and with a loud cry sprang towards Ulysses, but Ulysses instantly shotan arrow into his breast that caught him by the nipple and fixed itselfin his liver. He dropped his sword and fell doubled up over his table.The cup and all the meats went over on to the ground as he smote theearth with his forehead in the agonies of death, and he kicked thestool with his feet until his eyes were closed in darkness.Then Amphinomus drew his sword and made straight at Ulysses to try andget him away from the door; but Telemachus was too quick for him, andstruck him from behind; the spear caught him between the shoulders andwent right through his chest, so that he fell heavily to the ground andstruck the earth with his forehead. Then Telemachus sprang away fromhim, leaving his spear still in the body, for he feared that if hestayed to draw it out, some one of the Achaeans might come up and hackat him with his sword, or knock him down, so he set off at a run, andimmediately was at his father’s side. Then he said:“Father, let me bring you a shield, two spears, and a brass helmet foryour temples. I will arm myself as well, and will bring other armourfor the swineherd and the stockman, for we had better be armed.”“Run and fetch them,” answered Ulysses, “while my arrows hold out, orwhen I am alone they may get me away from the door.”Telemachus did as his father said, and went off to the store room wherethe armour was kept. He chose four shields, eight spears, and fourbrass helmets with horse-hair plumes. He brought them with all speed tohis father, and armed himself first, while the stockman and theswineherd also put on their armour, and took their places near Ulysses.Meanwhile Ulysses, as long as his arrows lasted, had been shooting thesuitors one by one, and they fell thick on one another: when his arrowsgave out, he set the bow to stand against the end wall of the house bythe door post, and hung a shield four hides thick about his shoulders;on his comely head he set his helmet, well wrought with a crest ofhorse-hair that nodded menacingly above it,168 and he grasped tworedoubtable bronze-shod spears.Now there was a trap door169 on the wall, while at one end of thepavement170 there was an exit leading to a narrow passage, and thisexit was closed by a well-made door. Ulysses told Philoetius to standby this door and guard it, for only one person could attack it at atime. But Agelaus shouted out, “Cannot some one go up to the trap doorand tell the people what is going on? Help would come at once, and weshould soon make an end of this man and his shooting.”“This may not be, Agelaus,” answered Melanthius, “the mouth of thenarrow passage is dangerously near the entrance to the outer court. Onebrave man could prevent any number from getting in. But I know what Iwill do, I will bring you arms from the store-room, for I am sure it isthere that Ulysses and his son have put them.”On this the goatherd Melanthius went by back passages to the store-roomof Ulysses’ house. There he chose twelve shields, with as many helmetsand spears, and brought them back as fast as he could to give them tothe suitors. Ulysses’ heart began to fail him when he saw thesuitors171 putting on their armour and brandishing their spears. He sawthe greatness of the danger, and said to Telemachus, “Some one of thewomen inside is helping the suitors against us, or it may beMelanthius.”Telemachus answered, “The fault, father, is mine, and mine only; I leftthe store room door open, and they have kept a sharper look out than Ihave. Go, Eumaeus, put the door to, and see whether it is one of thewomen who is doing this, or whether, as I suspect, it is Melanthius theson of Dolius.”Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Melanthius was again going to thestore room to fetch more armour, but the swineherd saw him and said toUlysses who was beside him, “Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, it is thatscoundrel Melanthius, just as we suspected, who is going to the storeroom. Say, shall I kill him, if I can get the better of him, or shall Ibring him here that you may take your own revenge for all the manywrongs that he has done in your house?”Ulysses answered, “Telemachus and I will hold these suitors in check,no matter what they do; go back both of you and bind Melanthius’ handsand feet behind him. Throw him into the store room and make the doorfast behind you; then fasten a noose about his body, and string himclose up to the rafters from a high bearing-post,172 that he may lingeron in an agony.”Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said; they went to thestore room, which they entered before Melanthius saw them, for he wasbusy searching for arms in the innermost part of the room, so the twotook their stand on either side of the door and waited. By and byMelanthius came out with a helmet in one hand, and an old dry-rottedshield in the other, which had been borne by Laertes when he was young,but which had been long since thrown aside, and the straps had becomeunsewn; on this the two seized him, dragged him back by the hair, andthrew him struggling to the ground. They bent his hands and feet wellbehind his back, and bound them tight with a painful bond as Ulysseshad told them; then they fastened a noose about his body and strung himup from a high pillar till he was close up to the rafters, and over himdid you then vaunt, O swineherd Eumaeus saying, “Melanthius, you willpass the night on a soft bed as you deserve. You will know very wellwhen morning comes from the streams of Oceanus, and it is time for youto be driving in your goats for the suitors to feast on.”There, then, they left him in very cruel bondage, and having put ontheir armour they closed the door behind them and went back to taketheir places by the side of Ulysses; whereon the four men stood in thecloister, fierce and full of fury; nevertheless, those who were in thebody of the court were still both brave and many. Then Jove’s daughterMinerva came up to them, having assumed the voice and form of Mentor.Ulysses was glad when he saw her and said, “Mentor, lend me your help,and forget not your old comrade, nor the many good turns he has doneyou. Besides, you are my age-mate.”But all the time he felt sure it was Minerva, and the suitors from theother side raised an uproar when they saw her. Agelaus was the first toreproach her. “Mentor,” he cried, “do not let Ulysses beguile you intosiding with him and fighting the suitors. This is what we will do: whenwe have killed these people, father and son, we will kill you too. Youshall pay for it with your head, and when we have killed you, we willtake all you have, in doors or out, and bring it into hotch-pot withUlysses’ property; we will not let your sons live in your house, noryour daughters, nor shall your widow continue to live in the city ofIthaca.”This made Minerva still more furious, so she scolded Ulysses veryangrily.173 “Ulysses,” said she, “your strength and prowess are nolonger what they were when you fought for nine long years among theTrojans about the noble lady Helen. You killed many a man in thosedays, and it was through your stratagem that Priam’s city was taken.How comes it that you are so lamentably less valiant now that you areon your own ground, face to face with the suitors in your own house?Come on, my good fellow, stand by my side and see how Mentor, son ofAlcimus shall fight your foes and requite your kindnesses conferredupon him.”But she would not give him full victory as yet, for she wished stillfurther to prove his own prowess and that of his brave son, so she flewup to one of the rafters in the roof of the cloister and sat upon it inthe form of a swallow.Meanwhile Agelaus son of Damastor, Eurynomus, Amphimedon, Demoptolemus,Pisander, and Polybus son of Polyctor bore the brunt of the fight uponthe suitors’ side; of all those who were still fighting for their livesthey were by far the most valiant, for the others had already fallenunder the arrows of Ulysses. Agelaus shouted to them and said, “Myfriends, he will soon have to leave off, for Mentor has gone away afterhaving done nothing for him but brag. They are standing at the doorsunsupported. Do not aim at him all at once, but six of you throw yourspears first, and see if you cannot cover yourselves with glory bykilling him. When he has fallen we need not be uneasy about theothers.”They threw their spears as he bade them, but Minerva made them all ofno effect. One hit the door post; another went against the door; thepointed shaft of another struck the wall; and as soon as they hadavoided all the spears of the suitors Ulysses said to his own men, “Myfriends, I should say we too had better let drive into the middle ofthem, or they will crown all the harm they have done us by killing usoutright.”They therefore aimed straight in front of them and threw their spears.Ulysses killed Demoptolemus, Telemachus Euryades, Eumaeus Elatus, whilethe stockman killed Pisander. These all bit the dust, and as the othersdrew back into a corner Ulysses and his men rushed forward and regainedtheir spears by drawing them from the bodies of the dead.The suitors now aimed a second time, but again Minerva made theirweapons for the most part without effect. One hit a bearing-post of thecloister; another went against the door; while the pointed shaft ofanother struck the wall. Still, Amphimedon just took a piece of the topskin from off Telemachus’s wrist, and Ctesippus managed to grazeEumaeus’s shoulder above his shield; but the spear went on and fell tothe ground. Then Ulysses and his men let drive into the crowd ofsuitors. Ulysses hit Eurydamas, Telemachus Amphimedon, and EumaeusPolybus. After this the stockman hit Ctesippus in the breast, andtaunted him saying, “Foul-mouthed son of Polytherses, do not be sofoolish as to talk wickedly another time, but let heaven direct yourspeech, for the gods are far stronger than men. I make you a present ofthis advice to repay you for the foot which you gave Ulysses when hewas begging about in his own house.”Thus spoke the stockman, and Ulysses struck the son of Damastor with aspear in close fight, while Telemachus hit Leocritus son of Evenor inthe belly, and the dart went clean through him, so that he fell forwardfull on his face upon the ground. Then Minerva from her seat on therafter held up her deadly aegis, and the hearts of the suitors quailed.They fled to the other end of the court like a herd of cattle maddenedby the gadfly in early summer when the days are at their longest. Aseagle-beaked, crook-taloned vultures from the mountains swoop down onthe smaller birds that cower in flocks upon the ground, and kill them,for they cannot either fight or fly, and lookers on enjoy thesport—even so did Ulysses and his men fall upon the suitors and smitethem on every side. They made a horrible groaning as their brains werebeing battered in, and the ground seethed with their blood.Leiodes then caught the knees of Ulysses and said, “Ulysses I beseechyou have mercy upon me and spare me. I never wronged any of the womenin your house either in word or deed, and I tried to stop the others. Isaw them, but they would not listen, and now they are paying for theirfolly. I was their sacrificing priest; if you kill me, I shall diewithout having done anything to deserve it, and shall have got nothanks for all the good that I did.”Ulysses looked sternly at him and answered, “If you were theirsacrificing priest, you must have prayed many a time that it might belong before I got home again, and that you might marry my wife and havechildren by her. Therefore you shall die.”With these words he picked up the sword that Agelaus had dropped whenhe was being killed, and which was lying upon the ground. Then hestruck Leiodes on the back of his neck, so that his head fell rollingin the dust while he was yet speaking.The minstrel Phemius son of Terpes—he who had been forced by thesuitors to sing to them—now tried to save his life. He was standingnear towards the trap door,174 and held his lyre in his hand. He didnot know whether to fly out of the cloister and sit down by the altarof Jove that was in the outer court, and on which both Laertes andUlysses had offered up the thigh bones of many an ox, or whether to gostraight up to Ulysses and embrace his knees, but in the end he deemedit best to embrace Ulysses’ knees. So he laid his lyre on the groundbetween the mixing bowl 175 and the silver-studded seat; then going upto Ulysses he caught hold of his knees and said, “Ulysses, I beseechyou have mercy on me and spare me. You will be sorry for it afterwardsif you kill a bard who can sing both for gods and men as I can. I makeall my lays myself, and heaven visits me with every kind ofinspiration. I would sing to you as though you were a god, do nottherefore be in such a hurry to cut my head off. Your own sonTelemachus will tell you that I did not want to frequent your house andsing to the suitors after their meals, but they were too many and toostrong for me, so they made me.”Telemachus heard him, and at once went up to his father. “Hold!” hecried, “the man is guiltless, do him no hurt; and we will spare Medontoo, who was always good to me when I was a boy, unless Philoetius orEumaeus has already killed him, or he has fallen in your way when youwere raging about the court.”Medon caught these words of Telemachus, for he was crouching under aseat beneath which he had hidden by covering himself up with a freshlyflayed heifer’s hide, so he threw off the hide, went up to Telemachus,and laid hold of his knees.“Here I am, my dear sir,” said he, “stay your hand therefore, and tellyour father, or he will kill me in his rage against the suitors forhaving wasted his substance and been so foolishly disrespectful toyourself.”Ulysses smiled at him and answered, “Fear not; Telemachus has savedyour life, that you may know in future, and tell other people, howgreatly better good deeds prosper than evil ones. Go, therefore,outside the cloisters into the outer court, and be out of the way ofthe slaughter—you and the bard—while I finish my work here inside.”The pair went into the outer court as fast as they could, and sat downby Jove’s great altar, looking fearfully round, and still expectingthat they would be killed. Then Ulysses searched the whole courtcarefully over, to see if anyone had managed to hide himself and wasstill living, but he found them all lying in the dust and weltering intheir blood. They were like fishes which fishermen have netted out ofthe sea, and thrown upon the beach to lie gasping for water till theheat of the sun makes an end of them. Even so were the suitors lyingall huddled up one against the other.Then Ulysses said to Telemachus, “Call nurse Euryclea; I have somethingto say to her.”Telemachus went and knocked at the door of the women’s room. “Makehaste,” said he, “you old woman who have been set over all the otherwomen in the house. Come outside; my father wishes to speak to you.”When Euryclea heard this she unfastened the door of the women’s roomand came out, following Telemachus. She found Ulysses among the corpsesbespattered with blood and filth like a lion that has just beendevouring an ox, and his breast and both his cheeks are all bloody, sothat he is a fearful sight; even so was Ulysses besmirched from head tofoot with gore. When she saw all the corpses and such a quantity ofblood, she was beginning to cry out for joy, for she saw that a greatdeed had been done; but Ulysses checked her, “Old woman,” said he,“rejoice in silence; restrain yourself, and do not make any noise aboutit; it is an unholy thing to vaunt over dead men. Heaven’s doom andtheir own evil deeds have brought these men to destruction, for theyrespected no man in the whole world, neither rich nor poor, who camenear them, and they have come to a bad end as a punishment for theirwickedness and folly. Now, however, tell me which of the women in thehouse have misconducted themselves, and who are innocent.”176“I will tell you the truth, my son,” answered Euryclea. “There arefifty women in the house whom we teach to do things, such as cardingwool, and all kinds of household work. Of these, twelve in all177 havemisbehaved, and have been wanting in respect to me, and also toPenelope. They showed no disrespect to Telemachus, for he has onlylately grown and his mother never permitted him to give orders to thefemale servants; but let me go upstairs and tell your wife all that hashappened, for some god has been sending her to sleep.”“Do not wake her yet,” answered Ulysses, “but tell the women who havemisconducted themselves to come to me.”Euryclea left the cloister to tell the women, and make them come toUlysses; in the meantime he called Telemachus, the stockman, and theswineherd. “Begin,” said he, “to remove the dead, and make the womenhelp you. Then, get sponges and clean water to swill down the tablesand seats. When you have thoroughly cleansed the whole cloisters, takethe women into the space between the domed room and the wall of theouter court, and run them through with your swords till they are quitedead, and have forgotten all about love and the way in which they usedto lie in secret with the suitors.”On this the women came down in a body, weeping and wailing bitterly.First they carried the dead bodies out, and propped them up against oneanother in the gatehouse. Ulysses ordered them about and made them dotheir work quickly, so they had to carry the bodies out. When they haddone this, they cleaned all the tables and seats with sponges andwater, while Telemachus and the two others shovelled up the blood anddirt from the ground, and the women carried it all away and put it outof doors. Then when they had made the whole place quite clean andorderly, they took the women out and hemmed them in the narrow spacebetween the wall of the domed room and that of the yard, so that theycould not get away: and Telemachus said to the other two, “I shall notlet these women die a clean death, for they were insolent to me and mymother, and used to sleep with the suitors.”So saying he made a ship’s cable fast to one of the bearing-posts thatsupported the roof of the domed room, and secured it all around thebuilding, at a good height, lest any of the women’s feet should touchthe ground; and as thrushes or doves beat against a net that has beenset for them in a thicket just as they were getting to their nest, anda terrible fate awaits them, even so did the women have to put theirheads in nooses one after the other and die most miserably.178 Theirfeet moved convulsively for a while, but not for very long.As for Melanthius, they took him through the cloister into the innercourt. There they cut off his nose and his ears; they drew out hisvitals and gave them to the dogs raw, and then in their fury they cutoff his hands and his feet.When they had done this they washed their hands and feet and went backinto the house, for all was now over; and Ulysses said to the dear oldnurse Euryclea, “Bring me sulphur, which cleanses all pollution, andfetch fire also that I may burn it, and purify the cloisters. Go,moreover, and tell Penelope to come here with her attendants, and alsoall the maidservants that are in the house.”“All that you have said is true,” answered Euryclea, “but let me bringyou some clean clothes—a shirt and cloak. Do not keep these rags onyour back any longer. It is not right.”“First light me a fire,” replied Ulysses.She brought the fire and sulphur, as he had bidden her, and Ulyssesthoroughly purified the cloisters and both the inner and outer courts.Then she went inside to call the women and tell them what had happened;whereon they came from their apartment with torches in their hands, andpressed round Ulysses to embrace him, kissing his head and shouldersand taking hold of his hands. It made him feel as if he should like toweep, for he remembered every one of them.179BOOK XXIIIPENELOPE EVENTUALLY RECOGNISES HER HUSBAND—EARLY IN THE MORNINGULYSSES, TELEMACHUS, EUMAEUS, AND PHILOETIUS LEAVE THE TOWN.Euryclea now went upstairs laughing to tell her mistress that her dearhusband had come home. Her aged knees became young again and her feetwere nimble for joy as she went up to her mistress and bent over herhead to speak to her. “Wake up Penelope, my dear child,” she exclaimed,“and see with your own eyes something that you have been wanting thislong time past. Ulysses has at last indeed come home again, and haskilled the suitors who were giving so much trouble in his house, eatingup his estate and ill treating his son.”“My good nurse,” answered Penelope, “you must be mad. The godssometimes send some very sensible people out of their minds, and makefoolish people become sensible. This is what they must have been doingto you; for you always used to be a reasonable person. Why should youthus mock me when I have trouble enough already—talking such nonsense,and waking me up out of a sweet sleep that had taken possession of myeyes and closed them? I have never slept so soundly from the day mypoor husband went to that city with the ill-omened name. Go back againinto the women’s room; if it had been any one else who had woke me upto bring me such absurd news I should have sent her away with a severescolding. As it is your age shall protect you.”“My dear child,” answered Euryclea, “I am not mocking you. It is quitetrue as I tell you that Ulysses is come home again. He was the strangerwhom they all kept on treating so badly in the cloister. Telemachusknew all the time that he was come back, but kept his father’s secretthat he might have his revenge on all these wicked people.”Then Penelope sprang up from her couch, threw her arms round Euryclea,and wept for joy. “But my dear nurse,” said she, “explain this to me;if he has really come home as you say, how did he manage to overcomethe wicked suitors single handed, seeing what a number of them therealways were?”“I was not there,” answered Euryclea, “and do not know; I only heardthem groaning while they were being killed. We sat crouching andhuddled up in a corner of the women’s room with the doors closed, tillyour son came to fetch me because his father sent him. Then I foundUlysses standing over the corpses that were lying on the ground allround him, one on top of the other. You would have enjoyed it if youcould have seen him standing there all bespattered with blood andfilth, and looking just like a lion. But the corpses are now all piledup in the gatehouse that is in the outer court, and Ulysses has lit agreat fire to purify the house with sulphur. He has sent me to callyou, so come with me that you may both be happy together after all; fornow at last the desire of your heart has been fulfilled; your husbandis come home to find both wife and son alive and well, and to take hisrevenge in his own house on the suitors who behaved so badly to him.”“My dear nurse,” said Penelope, “do not exult too confidently over allthis. You know how delighted every one would be to see Ulysses comehome—more particularly myself, and the son who has been born to both ofus; but what you tell me cannot be really true. It is some god who isangry with the suitors for their great wickedness, and has made an endof them; for they respected no man in the whole world, neither rich norpoor, who came near them, and they have come to a bad end inconsequence of their iniquity; Ulysses is dead far away from theAchaean land; he will never return home again.”Then nurse Euryclea said, “My child, what are you talking about? butyou were all hard of belief and have made up your mind that yourhusband is never coming, although he is in the house and by his ownfire side at this very moment. Besides I can give you another proof;when I was washing him I perceived the scar which the wild boar gavehim, and I wanted to tell you about it, but in his wisdom he would notlet me, and clapped his hands over my mouth; so come with me and I willmake this bargain with you—if I am deceiving you, you may have mekilled by the most cruel death you can think of.”“My dear nurse,” said Penelope, “however wise you may be you can hardlyfathom the counsels of the gods. Nevertheless, we will go in search ofmy son, that I may see the corpses of the suitors, and the man who haskilled them.”On this she came down from her upper room, and while doing so sheconsidered whether she should keep at a distance from her husband andquestion him, or whether she should at once go up to him and embracehim. When, however, she had crossed the stone floor of the cloister,she sat down opposite Ulysses by the fire, against the wall at rightangles180 [to that by which she had entered], while Ulysses sat nearone of the bearing-posts, looking upon the ground, and waiting to seewhat his brave wife would say to him when she saw him. For a long timeshe sat silent and as one lost in amazement. At one moment she lookedhim full in the face, but then again directly, she was misled by hisshabby clothes and failed to recognise him,181 till Telemachus began toreproach her and said:“Mother—but you are so hard that I cannot call you by such a name—whydo you keep away from my father in this way? Why do you not sit by hisside and begin talking to him and asking him questions? No other womancould bear to keep away from her husband when he had come back to herafter twenty years of absence, and after having gone through so much;but your heart always was as hard as a stone.”Penelope answered, “My son, I am so lost in astonishment that I canfind no words in which either to ask questions or to answer them. Icannot even look him straight in the face. Still, if he really isUlysses come back to his own home again, we shall get to understand oneanother better by and by, for there are tokens with which we two arealone acquainted, and which are hidden from all others.”Ulysses smiled at this, and said to Telemachus, “Let your mother put meto any proof she likes; she will make up her mind about it presently.She rejects me for the moment and believes me to be somebody else,because I am covered with dirt and have such bad clothes on; let us,however, consider what we had better do next. When one man has killedanother—even though he was not one who would leave many friends to takeup his quarrel—the man who has killed him must still say good bye tohis friends and fly the country; whereas we have been killing the stayof a whole town, and all the picked youth of Ithaca. I would have youconsider this matter.”“Look to it yourself, father,” answered Telemachus, “for they say youare the wisest counsellor in the world, and that there is no othermortal man who can compare with you. We will follow you with right goodwill, nor shall you find us fail you in so far as our strength holdsout.”“I will say what I think will be best,” answered Ulysses. “First washand put your shirts on; tell the maids also to go to their own room anddress; Phemius shall then strike up a dance tune on his lyre, so thatif people outside hear, or any of the neighbours, or some one goingalong the street happens to notice it, they may think there is awedding in the house, and no rumours about the death of the suitorswill get about in the town, before we can escape to the woods upon myown land. Once there, we will settle which of the courses heavenvouchsafes us shall seem wisest.”Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. First they washedand put their shirts on, while the women got ready. Then Phemius tookhis lyre and set them all longing for sweet song and stately dance. Thehouse re-echoed with the sound of men and women dancing, and the peopleoutside said, “I suppose the queen has been getting married at last.She ought to be ashamed of herself for not continuing to protect herhusband’s property until he comes home.”182This was what they said, but they did not know what it was that hadbeen happening. The upper servant Eurynome washed and anointed Ulyssesin his own house and gave him a shirt and cloak, while Minerva made himlook taller and stronger than before; she also made the hair grow thickon the top of his head, and flow down in curls like hyacinth blossoms;she glorified him about the head and shoulders just as a skilfulworkman who has studied art of all kinds under Vulcan or Minerva—andhis work is full of beauty—enriches a piece of silver plate by gildingit. He came from the bath looking like one of the immortals, and satdown opposite his wife on the seat he had left. “My dear,” said he,“heaven has endowed you with a heart more unyielding than woman everyet had. No other woman could bear to keep away from her husband whenhe had come back to her after twenty years of absence, and after havinggone through so much. But come, nurse, get a bed ready for me; I willsleep alone, for this woman has a heart as hard as iron.”“My dear,” answered Penelope, “I have no wish to set myself up, nor todepreciate you; but I am not struck by your appearance, for I very wellremember what kind of a man you were when you set sail from Ithaca.Nevertheless, Euryclea, take his bed outside the bed chamber that hehimself built. Bring the bed outside this room, and put bedding upon itwith fleeces, good coverlets, and blankets.”She said this to try him, but Ulysses was very angry and said, “Wife, Iam much displeased at what you have just been saying. Who has beentaking my bed from the place in which I left it? He must have found ita hard task, no matter how skilled a workman he was, unless some godcame and helped him to shift it. There is no man living, however strongand in his prime, who could move it from its place, for it is amarvellous curiosity which I made with my very own hands. There was ayoung olive growing within the precincts of the house, in full vigour,and about as thick as a bearing-post. I built my room round this withstrong walls of stone and a roof to cover them, and I made the doorsstrong and well-fitting. Then I cut off the top boughs of the olivetree and left the stump standing. This I dressed roughly from the rootupwards and then worked with carpenter’s tools well and skilfully,straightening my work by drawing a line on the wood, and making it intoa bed-prop. I then bored a hole down the middle, and made it thecentre-post of my bed, at which I worked till I had finished it,inlaying it with gold and silver; after this I stretched a hide ofcrimson leather from one side of it to the other. So you see I know allabout it, and I desire to learn whether it is still there, or whetherany one has been removing it by cutting down the olive tree at itsroots.”When she heard the sure proofs Ulysses now gave her, she fairly brokedown. She flew weeping to his side, flung her arms about his neck, andkissed him. “Do not be angry with me Ulysses,” she cried, “you, who arethe wisest of mankind. We have suffered, both of us. Heaven has deniedus the happiness of spending our youth, and of growing old, together;do not then be aggrieved or take it amiss that I did not embrace youthus as soon as I saw you. I have been shuddering all the time throughfear that someone might come here and deceive me with a lying story;for there are many very wicked people going about. Jove’s daughterHelen would never have yielded herself to a man from a foreign country,if she had known that the sons of Achaeans would come after her andbring her back. Heaven put it in her heart to do wrong, and she gave nothought to that sin, which has been the source of all our sorrows. Now,however, that you have convinced me by showing that you know all aboutour bed (which no human being has ever seen but you and I and a singlemaidservant, the daughter of Actor, who was given me by my father on mymarriage, and who keeps the doors of our room) hard of belief though Ihave been I can mistrust no longer.”Then Ulysses in his turn melted, and wept as he clasped his dear andfaithful wife to his bosom. As the sight of land is welcome to men whoare swimming towards the shore, when Neptune has wrecked their shipwith the fury of his winds and waves; a few alone reach the land, andthese, covered with brine, are thankful when they find themselves onfirm ground and out of danger—even so was her husband welcome to her asshe looked upon him, and she could not tear her two fair arms fromabout his neck. Indeed they would have gone on indulging their sorrowtill rosy-fingered morn appeared, had not Minerva determined otherwise,and held night back in the far west, while she would not suffer Dawn toleave Oceanus, nor to yoke the two steeds Lampus and Phaethon that bearher onward to break the day upon mankind.At last, however, Ulysses said, “Wife, we have not yet reached the endof our troubles. I have an unknown amount of toil still to undergo. Itis long and difficult, but I must go through with it, for thus theshade of Teiresias prophesied concerning me, on the day when I wentdown into Hades to ask about my return and that of my companions. Butnow let us go to bed, that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boonof sleep.”“You shall go to bed as soon as you please,” replied Penelope, “nowthat the gods have sent you home to your own good house and to yourcountry. But as heaven has put it in your mind to speak of it, tell meabout the task that lies before you. I shall have to hear about itlater, so it is better that I should be told at once.”“My dear,” answered Ulysses, “why should you press me to tell you?Still, I will not conceal it from you, though you will not like it. Ido not like it myself, for Teiresias bade me travel far and wide,carrying an oar, till I came to a country where the people have neverheard of the sea, and do not even mix salt with their food. They knownothing about ships, nor oars that are as the wings of a ship. He gaveme this certain token which I will not hide from you. He said that awayfarer should meet me and ask me whether it was a winnowing shovelthat I had on my shoulder. On this, I was to fix my oar in the groundand sacrifice a ram, a bull, and a boar to Neptune; after which I wasto go home and offer hecatombs to all the gods in heaven, one after theother. As for myself, he said that death should come to me from thesea, and that my life should ebb away very gently when I was full ofyears and peace of mind, and my people should bless me. All this, hesaid, should surely come to pass.”And Penelope said, “If the gods are going to vouchsafe you a happiertime in your old age, you may hope then to have some respite frommisfortune.”Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Eurynome and the nurse took torchesand made the bed ready with soft coverlets; as soon as they had laidthem, the nurse went back into the house to go to her rest, leaving thebed chamber woman Eurynome183 to show Ulysses and Penelope to bed bytorch light. When she had conducted them to their room she went back,and they then came joyfully to the rites of their own old bed.Telemachus, Philoetius, and the swineherd now left off dancing, andmade the women leave off also. They then laid themselves down to sleepin the cloisters.When Ulysses and Penelope had had their fill of love they fell talkingwith one another. She told him how much she had had to bear in seeingthe house filled with a crowd of wicked suitors who had killed so manysheep and oxen on her account, and had drunk so many casks of wine.Ulysses in his turn told her what he had suffered, and how much troublehe had himself given to other people. He told her everything, and shewas so delighted to listen that she never went to sleep till he hadended his whole story.He began with his victory over the Cicons, and how he thence reachedthe fertile land of the Lotus-eaters. He told her all about the Cyclopsand how he had punished him for having so ruthlessly eaten his bravecomrades; how he then went on to Aeolus, who received him hospitablyand furthered him on his way, but even so he was not to reach home, forto his great grief a hurricane carried him out to sea again; how hewent on to the Laestrygonian city Telepylos, where the people destroyedall his ships with their crews, save himself and his own ship only.Then he told of cunning Circe and her craft, and how he sailed to thechill house of Hades, to consult the ghost of the Theban prophetTeiresias, and how he saw his old comrades in arms, and his mother whobore him and brought him up when he was a child; how he then heard thewondrous singing of the Sirens, and went on to the wandering rocks andterrible Charybdis and to Scylla, whom no man had ever yet passed insafety; how his men then ate the cattle of the sun-god, and how Jovetherefore struck the ship with his thunderbolts, so that all his menperished together, himself alone being left alive; how at last hereached the Ogygian island and the nymph Calypso, who kept him there ina cave, and fed him, and wanted him to marry her, in which case sheintended making him immortal so that he should never grow old, but shecould not persuade him to let her do so; and how after much sufferinghe had found his way to the Phaeacians, who had treated him as thoughhe had been a god, and sent him back in a ship to his own country afterhaving given him gold, bronze, and raiment in great abundance. This wasthe last thing about which he told her, for here a deep sleep took holdupon him and eased the burden of his sorrows.Then Minerva bethought her of another matter. When she deemed thatUlysses had had both of his wife and of repose, she bade gold-enthronedDawn rise out of Oceanus that she might shed light upon mankind. Onthis, Ulysses rose from his comfortable bed and said to Penelope,“Wife, we have both of us had our full share of troubles, you, here, inlamenting my absence, and I in being prevented from getting home thoughI was longing all the time to do so. Now, however, that we have at lastcome together, take care of the property that is in the house. As forthe sheep and goats which the wicked suitors have eaten, I will takemany myself by force from other people, and will compel the Achaeans tomake good the rest till they shall have filled all my yards. I am nowgoing to the wooded lands out in the country to see my father who hasso long been grieved on my account, and to yourself I will give theseinstructions, though you have little need of them. At sunrise it willat once get abroad that I have been killing the suitors; go upstairs,therefore,184 and stay there with your women. See nobody and ask noquestions.”185As he spoke he girded on his armour. Then he roused Telemachus,Philoetius, and Eumaeus, and told them all to put on their armour also.This they did, and armed themselves. When they had done so, they openedthe gates and sallied forth, Ulysses leading the way. It was nowdaylight, but Minerva nevertheless concealed them in darkness and ledthem quickly out of the town.BOOK XXIVTHE GHOSTS OF THE SUITORS IN HADES—ULYSSES AND HIS MEN GO TO THE HOUSEOF LAERTES—THE PEOPLE OF ITHACA COME OUT TO ATTACK ULYSSES, BUT MINERVACONCLUDES A PEACE.Then Mercury of Cyllene summoned the ghosts of the suitors, and in hishand he held the fair golden wand with which he seals men’s eyes insleep or wakes them just as he pleases; with this he roused the ghostsand led them, while they followed whining and gibbering behind him. Asbats fly squealing in the hollow of some great cave, when one of themhas fallen out of the cluster in which they hang, even so did theghosts whine and squeal as Mercury the healer of sorrow led them downinto the dark abode of death. When they had passed the waters ofOceanus and the rock Leucas, they came to the gates of the sun and theland of dreams, whereon they reached the meadow of asphodel where dwellthe souls and shadows of them that can labour no more.Here they found the ghost of Achilles son of Peleus, with those ofPatroclus, Antilochus, and Ajax, who was the finest and handsomest manof all the Danaans after the son of Peleus himself.They gathered round the ghost of the son of Peleus, and the ghost ofAgamemnon joined them, sorrowing bitterly. Round him were gathered alsothe ghosts of those who had perished with him in the house ofAegisthus; and the ghost of Achilles spoke first.“Son of Atreus,” it said, “we used to say that Jove had loved youbetter from first to last than any other hero, for you were captainover many and brave men, when we were all fighting together beforeTroy; yet the hand of death, which no mortal can escape, was laid uponyou all too early. Better for you had you fallen at Troy in the hey-dayof your renown, for the Achaeans would have built a mound over yourashes, and your son would have been heir to your good name, whereas ithas now been your lot to come to a most miserable end.”“Happy son of Peleus,” answered the ghost of Agamemnon, “for havingdied at Troy far from Argos, while the bravest of the Trojans and theAchaeans fell round you fighting for your body. There you lay in thewhirling clouds of dust, all huge and hugely, heedless now of yourchivalry. We fought the whole of the livelong day, nor should we everhave left off if Jove had not sent a hurricane to stay us. Then, whenwe had borne you to the ships out of the fray, we laid you on your bedand cleansed your fair skin with warm water and with ointments. TheDanaans tore their hair and wept bitterly round about you. Your mother,when she heard, came with her immortal nymphs from out of the sea, andthe sound of a great wailing went forth over the waters so that theAchaeans quaked for fear. They would have fled panic-stricken to theirships had not wise old Nestor whose counsel was ever truest checkedthem saying, ‘Hold, Argives, fly not sons of the Achaeans, this is hismother coming from the sea with her immortal nymphs to view the body ofher son.’“Thus he spoke, and the Achaeans feared no more. The daughters of theold man of the sea stood round you weeping bitterly, and clothed you inimmortal raiment. The nine muses also came and lifted up their sweetvoices in lament—calling and answering one another; there was not anArgive but wept for pity of the dirge they chaunted. Days and nightsseven and ten we mourned you, mortals and immortals, but on theeighteenth day we gave you to the flames, and many a fat sheep withmany an ox did we slay in sacrifice around you. You were burnt inraiment of the gods, with rich resins and with honey, while heroes,horse and foot, clashed their armour round the pile as you wereburning, with the tramp as of a great multitude. But when the flames ofheaven had done their work, we gathered your white bones at daybreakand laid them in ointments and in pure wine. Your mother brought us agolden vase to hold them—gift of Bacchus, and work of Vulcan himself;in this we mingled your bleached bones with those of Patroclus who hadgone before you, and separate we enclosed also those of Antilochus, whohad been closer to you than any other of your comrades now thatPatroclus was no more.“Over these the host of the Argives built a noble tomb, on a pointjutting out over the open Hellespont, that it might be seen from farout upon the sea by those now living and by them that shall be bornhereafter. Your mother begged prizes from the gods, and offered them tobe contended for by the noblest of the Achaeans. You must have beenpresent at the funeral of many a hero, when the young men girdthemselves and make ready to contend for prizes on the death of somegreat chieftain, but you never saw such prizes as silver-footed Thetisoffered in your honour; for the gods loved you well. Thus even in deathyour fame, Achilles, has not been lost, and your name lives evermoreamong all mankind. But as for me, what solace had I when the days of myfighting were done? For Jove willed my destruction on my return, by thehands of Aegisthus and those of my wicked wife.”Thus did they converse, and presently Mercury came up to them with theghosts of the suitors who had been killed by Ulysses. The ghosts ofAgamemnon and Achilles were astonished at seeing them, and went up tothem at once. The ghost of Agamemnon recognised Amphimedon son ofMelaneus, who lived in Ithaca and had been his host, so it began totalk to him.“Amphimedon,” it said, “what has happened to all you fine young men—allof an age too—that you are come down here under the ground? One couldpick no finer body of men from any city. Did Neptune raise his windsand waves against you when you were at sea, or did your enemies make anend of you on the mainland when you were cattle-lifting orsheep-stealing, or while fighting in defence of their wives and city?Answer my question, for I have been your guest. Do you not remember howI came to your house with Menelaus, to persuade Ulysses to join us withhis ships against Troy? It was a whole month ere we could resume ourvoyage, for we had hard work to persuade Ulysses to come with us.”And the ghost of Amphimedon answered, “Agamemnon, son of Atreus, kingof men, I remember everything that you have said, and will tell youfully and accurately about the way in which our end was brought about.Ulysses had been long gone, and we were courting his wife, who did notsay point blank that she would not marry, nor yet bring matters to anend, for she meant to compass our destruction: this, then, was thetrick she played us. She set up a great tambour frame in her room andbegan to work on an enormous piece of fine needlework. ‘Sweethearts,’said she, ‘Ulysses is indeed dead, still, do not press me to marryagain immediately; wait—for I would not have my skill in needleworkperish unrecorded—till I have completed a pall for the hero Laertes,against the time when death shall take him. He is very rich, and thewomen of the place will talk if he is laid out without a pall.’ This iswhat she said, and we assented; whereupon we could see her working uponher great web all day long, but at night she would unpick the stitchesagain by torchlight. She fooled us in this way for three years withoutour finding it out, but as time wore on and she was now in her fourthyear, in the waning of moons and many days had been accomplished, oneof her maids who knew what she was doing told us, and we caught her inthe act of undoing her work, so she had to finish it whether she wouldor no; and when she showed us the robe she had made, after she had hadit washed,186 its splendour was as that of the sun or moon.“Then some malicious god conveyed Ulysses to the upland farm where hisswineherd lives. Thither presently came also his son, returning from avoyage to Pylos, and the two came to the town when they had hatchedtheir plot for our destruction. Telemachus came first, and then afterhim, accompanied by the swineherd, came Ulysses, clad in rags andleaning on a staff as though he were some miserable old beggar. He cameso unexpectedly that none of us knew him, not even the older ones amongus, and we reviled him and threw things at him. He endured both beingstruck and insulted without a word, though he was in his own house; butwhen the will of Aegis-bearing Jove inspired him, he and Telemachustook the armour and hid it in an inner chamber, bolting the doorsbehind them. Then he cunningly made his wife offer his bow and aquantity of iron to be contended for by us ill-fated suitors; and thiswas the beginning of our end, for not one of us could string thebow—nor nearly do so. When it was about to reach the hands of Ulysses,we all of us shouted out that it should not be given him, no matterwhat he might say, but Telemachus insisted on his having it. When hehad got it in his hands he strung it with ease and sent his arrowthrough the iron. Then he stood on the floor of the cloister and pouredhis arrows on the ground, glaring fiercely about him. First he killedAntinous, and then, aiming straight before him, he let fly his deadlydarts and they fell thick on one another. It was plain that some one ofthe gods was helping them, for they fell upon us with might and mainthroughout the cloisters, and there was a hideous sound of groaning asour brains were being battered in, and the ground seethed with ourblood. This, Agamemnon, is how we came by our end, and our bodies arelying still uncared for in the house of Ulysses, for our friends athome do not yet know what has happened, so that they cannot lay us outand wash the black blood from our wounds, making moan over us accordingto the offices due to the departed.”“Happy Ulysses, son of Laertes,” replied the ghost of Agamemnon, “youare indeed blessed in the possession of a wife endowed with such rareexcellence of understanding, and so faithful to her wedded lord asPenelope the daughter of Icarius. The fame, therefore, of her virtueshall never die, and the immortals shall compose a song that shall bewelcome to all mankind in honour of the constancy of Penelope. How farotherwise was the wickedness of the daughter of Tyndareus who killedher lawful husband; her song shall be hateful among men, for she hasbrought disgrace on all womankind even on the good ones.”Thus did they converse in the house of Hades deep down within thebowels of the earth. Meanwhile Ulysses and the others passed out of thetown and soon reached the fair and well-tilled farm of Laertes, whichhe had reclaimed with infinite labour. Here was his house, with alean-to running all round it, where the slaves who worked for him sleptand sat and ate, while inside the house there was an old Sicel woman,who looked after him in this his country-farm. When Ulysses got there,he said to his son and to the other two:“Go to the house, and kill the best pig that you can find for dinner.Meanwhile I want to see whether my father will know me, or fail torecognise me after so long an absence.”He then took off his armour and gave it to Eumaeus and Philoetius, whowent straight on to the house, while he turned off into the vineyard tomake trial of his father. As he went down into the great orchard, hedid not see Dolius, nor any of his sons nor of the other bondsmen, forthey were all gathering thorns to make a fence for the vineyard, at theplace where the old man had told them; he therefore found his fatheralone, hoeing a vine. He had on a dirty old shirt, patched and veryshabby; his legs were bound round with thongs of oxhide to save himfrom the brambles, and he also wore sleeves of leather; he had a goatskin cap on his head, and was looking very woe-begone. When Ulysses sawhim so worn, so old and full of sorrow, he stood still under a tallpear tree and began to weep. He doubted whether to embrace him, kisshim, and tell him all about his having come home, or whether he shouldfirst question him and see what he would say. In the end he deemed itbest to be crafty with him, so in this mind he went up to his father,who was bending down and digging about a plant.“I see, sir,” said Ulysses, “that you are an excellent gardener—whatpains you take with it, to be sure. There is not a single plant, not afig tree, vine, olive, pear, nor flower bed, but bears the trace ofyour attention. I trust, however, that you will not be offended if Isay that you take better care of your garden than of yourself. You areold, unsavoury, and very meanly clad. It cannot be because you are idlethat your master takes such poor care of you, indeed your face andfigure have nothing of the slave about them, and proclaim you of noblebirth. I should have said that you were one of those who should washwell, eat well, and lie soft at night as old men have a right to do;but tell me, and tell me true, whose bondman are you, and in whosegarden are you working? Tell me also about another matter. Is thisplace that I have come to really Ithaca? I met a man just now who saidso, but he was a dull fellow, and had not the patience to hear my storyout when I was asking him about an old friend of mine, whether he wasstill living, or was already dead and in the house of Hades. Believe mewhen I tell you that this man came to my house once when I was in myown country and never yet did any stranger come to me whom I likedbetter. He said that his family came from Ithaca and that his fatherwas Laertes, son of Arceisius. I received him hospitably, making himwelcome to all the abundance of my house, and when he went away I gavehim all customary presents. I gave him seven talents of fine gold, anda cup of solid silver with flowers chased upon it. I gave him twelvelight cloaks, and as many pieces of tapestry; I also gave him twelvecloaks of single fold, twelve rugs, twelve fair mantles, and an equalnumber of shirts. To all this I added four good looking women skilledin all useful arts, and I let him take his choice.”His father shed tears and answered, “Sir, you have indeed come to thecountry that you have named, but it is fallen into the hands of wickedpeople. All this wealth of presents has been given to no purpose. Ifyou could have found your friend here alive in Ithaca, he would haveentertained you hospitably and would have requited your presents amplywhen you left him—as would have been only right considering what youhad already given him. But tell me, and tell me true, how many years isit since you entertained this guest—my unhappy son, as ever was? Alas!He has perished far from his own country; the fishes of the sea haveeaten him, or he has fallen a prey to the birds and wild beasts of somecontinent. Neither his mother, nor I his father, who were his parents,could throw our arms about him and wrap him in his shroud, nor couldhis excellent and richly dowered wife Penelope bewail her husband aswas natural upon his death bed, and close his eyes according to theoffices due to the departed. But now, tell me truly for I want to know.Who and whence are you—tell me of your town and parents? Where is theship lying that has brought you and your men to Ithaca? Or were you apassenger on some other man’s ship, and those who brought you here havegone on their way and left you?”“I will tell you everything,” answered Ulysses, “quite truly. I comefrom Alybas, where I have a fine house. I am son of king Apheidas, whois the son of Polypemon. My own name is Eperitus; heaven drove me offmy course as I was leaving Sicania, and I have been carried hereagainst my will. As for my ship it is lying over yonder, off the opencountry outside the town, and this is the fifth year since Ulysses leftmy country. Poor fellow, yet the omens were good for him when he leftme. The birds all flew on our right hands, and both he and I rejoicedto see them as we parted, for we had every hope that we should haveanother friendly meeting and exchange presents.”A dark cloud of sorrow fell upon Laertes as he listened. He filled bothhands with the dust from off the ground and poured it over his greyhead, groaning heavily as he did so. The heart of Ulysses was touched,and his nostrils quivered as he looked upon his father; then he sprangtowards him, flung his arms about him and kissed him, saying, “I am he,father, about whom you are asking—I have returned after having beenaway for twenty years. But cease your sighing and lamentation—we haveno time to lose, for I should tell you that I have been killing thesuitors in my house, to punish them for their insolence and crimes.”“If you really are my son Ulysses,” replied Laertes, “and have comeback again, you must give me such manifest proof of your identity asshall convince me.”“First observe this scar,” answered Ulysses, “which I got from a boar’stusk when I was hunting on Mt. Parnassus. You and my mother had sent meto Autolycus, my mother’s father, to receive the presents which when hewas over here he had promised to give me. Furthermore I will point outto you the trees in the vineyard which you gave me, and I asked you allabout them as I followed you round the garden. We went over them all,and you told me their names and what they all were. You gave methirteen pear trees, ten apple trees, and forty fig trees; you alsosaid you would give me fifty rows of vines; there was corn plantedbetween each row, and they yield grapes of every kind when the heat ofheaven has been laid heavy upon them.”Laertes’ strength failed him when he heard the convincing proofs whichhis son had given him. He threw his arms about him, and Ulysses had tosupport him, or he would have gone off into a swoon; but as soon as hecame to, and was beginning to recover his senses, he said, “O fatherJove, then you gods are still in Olympus after all, if the suitors havereally been punished for their insolence and folly. Nevertheless, I ammuch afraid that I shall have all the townspeople of Ithaca up heredirectly, and they will be sending messengers everywhere throughout thecities of the Cephallenians.”Ulysses answered, “Take heart and do not trouble yourself about that,but let us go into the house hard by your garden. I have already toldTelemachus, Philoetius, and Eumaeus to go on there and get dinner readyas soon as possible.”Thus conversing the two made their way towards the house. When they gotthere they found Telemachus with the stockman and the swineherd cuttingup meat and mixing wine with water. Then the old Sicel woman tookLaertes inside and washed him and anointed him with oil. She put him ona good cloak, and Minerva came up to him and gave him a more imposingpresence, making him taller and stouter than before. When he came backhis son was surprised to see him looking so like an immortal, and saidto him, “My dear father, some one of the gods has been making you muchtaller and better-looking.”Laertes answered, “Would, by Father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, that Iwere the man I was when I ruled among the Cephallenians, and tookNericum, that strong fortress on the foreland. If I were still what Ithen was and had been in our house yesterday with my armour on, Ishould have been able to stand by you and help you against the suitors.I should have killed a great many of them, and you would have rejoicedto see it.”Thus did they converse; but the others, when they had finished theirwork and the feast was ready, left off working, and took each hisproper place on the benches and seats. Then they began eating; by andby old Dolius and his sons left their work and came up, for theirmother, the Sicel woman who looked after Laertes now that he wasgrowing old, had been to fetch them. When they saw Ulysses and werecertain it was he, they stood there lost in astonishment; but Ulyssesscolded them good naturedly and said, “Sit down to your dinner, oldman, and never mind about your surprise; we have been wanting to beginfor some time and have been waiting for you.”Then Dolius put out both his hands and went up to Ulysses. “Sir,” saidhe, seizing his master’s hand and kissing it at the wrist, “we havelong been wishing you home: and now heaven has restored you to us afterwe had given up hoping. All hail, therefore, and may the gods prosperyou.187 But tell me, does Penelope already know of your return, orshall we send some one to tell her?”“Old man,” answered Ulysses, “she knows already, so you need nottrouble about that.” On this he took his seat, and the sons of Doliusgathered round Ulysses to give him greeting and embrace him one afterthe other; then they took their seats in due order near Dolius theirfather.While they were thus busy getting their dinner ready, Rumour went roundthe town, and noised abroad the terrible fate that had befallen thesuitors; as soon, therefore, as the people heard of it they gatheredfrom every quarter, groaning and hooting before the house of Ulysses.They took the dead away, buried every man his own, and put the bodiesof those who came from elsewhere on board the fishing vessels, for thefishermen to take each of them to his own place. They then met angrilyin the place of assembly, and when they were got together Eupeithesrose to speak. He was overwhelmed with grief for the death of his sonAntinous, who had been the first man killed by Ulysses, so he said,weeping bitterly, “My friends, this man has done the Achaeans greatwrong. He took many of our best men away with him in his fleet, and hehas lost both ships and men; now, moreover, on his return he has beenkilling all the foremost men among the Cephallenians. Let us be up anddoing before he can get away to Pylos or to Elis where the Epeans rule,or we shall be ashamed of ourselves for ever afterwards. It will be aneverlasting disgrace to us if we do not avenge the murder of our sonsand brothers. For my own part I should have no more pleasure in life,but had rather die at once. Let us be up, then, and after them, beforethey can cross over to the main land.”He wept as he spoke and every one pitied him. But Medon and the bardPhemius had now woke up, and came to them from the house of Ulysses.Every one was astonished at seeing them, but they stood in the middleof the assembly, and Medon said, “Hear me, men of Ithaca. Ulysses didnot do these things against the will of heaven. I myself saw animmortal god take the form of Mentor and stand beside him. This godappeared, now in front of him encouraging him, and now going furiouslyabout the court and attacking the suitors whereon they fell thick onone another.”On this pale fear laid hold of them, and old Halitherses, son ofMastor, rose to speak, for he was the only man among them who knew bothpast and future; so he spoke to them plainly and in all honesty,saying,“Men of Ithaca, it is all your own fault that things have turned out asthey have; you would not listen to me, nor yet to Mentor, when we badeyou check the folly of your sons who were doing much wrong in thewantonness of their hearts—wasting the substance and dishonouring thewife of a chieftain who they thought would not return. Now, however,let it be as I say, and do as I tell you. Do not go out againstUlysses, or you may find that you have been drawing down evil on yourown heads.”This was what he said, and more than half raised a loud shout, and atonce left the assembly. But the rest stayed where they were, for thespeech of Halitherses displeased them, and they sided with Eupeithes;they therefore hurried off for their armour, and when they had armedthemselves, they met together in front of the city, and Eupeithes ledthem on in their folly. He thought he was going to avenge the murder ofhis son, whereas in truth he was never to return, but was himself toperish in his attempt.Then Minerva said to Jove, “Father, son of Saturn, king of kings,answer me this question—What do you propose to do? Will you set themfighting still further, or will you make peace between them?”And Jove answered, “My child, why should you ask me? Was it not by yourown arrangement that Ulysses came home and took his revenge upon thesuitors? Do whatever you like, but I will tell you what I think will bemost reasonable arrangement. Now that Ulysses is revenged, let themswear to a solemn covenant, in virtue of which he shall continue torule, while we cause the others to forgive and forget the massacre oftheir sons and brothers. Let them then all become friends asheretofore, and let peace and plenty reign.”This was what Minerva was already eager to bring about, so down shedarted from off the topmost summits of Olympus.Now when Laertes and the others had done dinner, Ulysses began bysaying, “Some of you go out and see if they are not getting close up tous.” So one of Dolius’s sons went as he was bid. Standing on thethreshold he could see them all quite near, and said to Ulysses, “Herethey are, let us put on our armour at once.”They put on their armour as fast as they could—that is to say Ulysses,his three men, and the six sons of Dolius. Laertes also and Dolius didthe same—warriors by necessity in spite of their grey hair. When theyhad all put on their armour, they opened the gate and sallied forth,Ulysses leading the way.Then Jove’s daughter Minerva came up to them, having assumed the formand voice of Mentor. Ulysses was glad when he saw her, and said to hisson Telemachus, “Telemachus, now that you are about to fight in anengagement, which will show every man’s mettle, be sure not to disgraceyour ancestors, who were eminent for their strength and courage all theworld over.”“You say truly, my dear father,” answered Telemachus, “and you shallsee, if you will, that I am in no mind to disgrace your family.”Laertes was delighted when he heard this. “Good heavens,” he exclaimed,“what a day I am enjoying: I do indeed rejoice at it. My son andgrandson are vying with one another in the matter of valour.”On this Minerva came close up to him and said, “Son of Arceisius—-bestfriend I have in the world—pray to the blue-eyed damsel, and to Joveher father; then poise your spear and hurl it.”As she spoke she infused fresh vigour into him, and when he had prayedto her he poised his spear and hurled it. He hit Eupeithes’ helmet, andthe spear went right through it, for the helmet stayed it not, and hisarmour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground.Meantime Ulysses and his son fell upon the front line of the foe andsmote them with their swords and spears; indeed, they would have killedevery one of them, and prevented them from ever getting home again,only Minerva raised her voice aloud, and made every one pause. “Men ofIthaca,” she cried, “cease this dreadful war, and settle the matter atonce without further bloodshed.”On this pale fear seized every one; they were so frightened that theirarms dropped from their hands and fell upon the ground at the sound ofthe goddess’ voice, and they fled back to the city for their lives. ButUlysses gave a great cry, and gathering himself together swooped downlike a soaring eagle. Then the son of Saturn sent a thunderbolt of firethat fell just in front of Minerva, so she said to Ulysses, “Ulysses,noble son of Laertes, stop this warful strife, or Jove will be angrywith you.”Thus spoke Minerva, and Ulysses obeyed her gladly. Then Minerva assumedthe form and voice of Mentor, and presently made a covenant of peacebetween the two contending parties.FOOTNOTES:[1] [ Black races are evidently known to the writer as stretching allacross Africa, one half looking West on to the Atlantic, and the otherEast on to the Indian Ocean.][2] [ The original use of the footstool was probably less to rest thefeet than to keep them (especially when bare) from a floor which wasoften wet and dirty.][3] [ The θρόνος or seat, is occasionally called “high,” as beinghigher than the θρῆνυς or low footstool. It was probably no higher thanan ordinary chair is now, and seems to have had no back.][4] [ Temesa was on the West Coast of the toe of Italy, in what is nowthe gulf of Sta Eufemia. It was famous in remote times for its coppermines, which, however, were worked out when Strabo wrote.][5] [ i.e. “with a current in it”—see illustrations and map near theend of bks. v. and vi. respectively.][6] [ Reading Νηρίτῳ for Νηίῳ, cf. “Od.” iii. 81 where the same mistakeis made, and xiii. 351 where the mountain is called Neritum, the sameplace being intended both here and in book xiii.][7] [ It is never plausibly explained why Penelope cannot do this, andfrom bk. ii. it is clear that she kept on deliberately encouraging thesuitors, though we are asked to believe that she was only foolingthem.][8] [ See note on “Od.” i. 365.][9] [ Middle Argos means the Peleponnese which, however, is never socalled in the “Iliad”. I presume “middle” means “middle between the twoGreek-speaking countries of Asia Minor and Sicily, with South Italy”;for that parts of Sicily and also large parts, though not the whole ofSouth Italy, were inhabited by Greek-speaking races centuries beforethe Dorian colonisations can hardly be doubted. The Sicians, and alsothe Sicels, both of them probably spoke Greek.][10] [ cf. “Il.” vi. 490-495. In the “Iliad” it is “war,” not “speech,”that is a man’s matter. It argues a certain hardness, or at any ratedislike of the “Iliad” on the part of the writer of the “Odyssey,” thatshe should have adopted Hector’s farewell to Andromache here, aselsewhere in the poem, for a scene of such inferior pathos.][11] [ μέγαρα σκιοέντα The whole open court with the covered cloisterrunning round it was called μέγαρον, or μέγαρα, but the covered partwas distinguished by being called “shady” or “shadow-giving”. It was inthis part that the tables for the suitors were laid. The Fountain Courtat Hampton Court may serve as an illustration (save as regards the useof arches instead of wooden supports and rafters) and the arrangementis still common in Sicily. The usual translation “shadowy” or “dusky”halls, gives a false idea of the scene.][12] [ The reader will note the extreme care which the writer takes tomake it clear that none of the suitors were allowed to sleep inUlysses’ house.][13] [ See Appendix; g, in plan of Ulysses’ house.][14] [ I imagine this passage to be a rejoinder to “Il.” xxiii. 702-705in which a tripod is valued at twelve oxen, and a good useful maid ofall work at only four. The scrupulous regard of Laertes for his wife’sfeelings is of a piece with the extreme jealousy for the honour ofwoman, which is manifest throughout the “Odyssey”.][15] [ χιτῶνα “The χιτών, or _tunica_, was a shirt or shift, and servedas the chief under garment of the Greeks and Romans, whether men orwomen.” Smith’s Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities, under“Tunica”.][16] [ Doors fastened to all intents and purposes as here described maybe seen in the older houses at Trapani. There is a slot on the outerside of the door by means of which a person who has left the room canshoot the bolt. My bedroom at the Albergo Centrale was fastened in thisway.][17] [ πύματον δ’ ὡπλίσσατο δόρπον. So we vulgarly say “had cooked hisgoose,” or “had settled his hash.” Ægyptius cannot of course know ofthe fate Antiphus had met with, for there had as yet been no news of orfrom Ulysses.][18] [ “Il.” xxii. 416. σχέσθε φίλοι, καὶ μ’ οἷον ἐάσατε...... Theauthoress has bungled by borrowing these words verbatim from the“Iliad”, without prefixing the necessary “do not,” which I havesupplied.][19] [ i.e. you have money, and could pay when I got judgment, whereasthe suitors are men of straw.][20] [ cf. “Il.” ii. 76. ἦ τοι ὄ γ’ ὦς εὶπὼν κατ’ ἄρ’ ἔζετο τοῖσι δ’ἀνέστηΝέστωρ, ὄς ῥα.......................................ὄ σφιν ἐὺ φρονέων ἀγορήσατο καὶ μετέειπεν.The Odyssean passage runs—“ἦ τοι ὄ γ’ ὦς εὶπὼν κατ’ ἄρ’ ἔζετο τοῖσι δ’ ἀνέστηΜεντορ ὄς ῥ’.......................................ὄ σφιν ἐὺ φρονέων ἀγορήσατο καὶ μετέειπεν.Is it possible not to suspect that the name Mentor was coined upon thatof Nestor?][21] [ i.e. in the outer court, and in the uncovered part of the innerhouse.][22] [ This would be fair from Sicily, which was doing duty for Ithacain the mind of the writer, but a North wind would have been preferablefor a voyage from the real Ithaca to Pylos.][23] [ κελάδοντ’ ἐπὶ οὶνοπα πόντον The wind does not whistle overwaves. It only whistles through rigging or some other obstacle thatcuts it.][24] [ cf. “Il.” v.20. Ἰδαῖος δ’ ἀπόρουσε λιπὼν περικαλλέα δίφρον, theOdyssean line is ἠέλιος δ’ ἀνόρουσε λιπὼν περικαλλέα λίμνην. There canbe no doubt that the Odyssean line was suggested by the Iliadic, butnothing can explain why Idæus jumping from his chariot should suggestto the writer of the “Odyssey” the sun jumping from the sea. Theprobability is that she never gave the matter a thought, but took theline in question as an effect of saturation with the “Iliad,” and ofunconscious cerebration. The “Odyssey” contains many such examples.][25] [ The heart, liver, lights, kidneys, etc. were taken out from theinside and eaten first as being more readily cooked; the {Greek}, orbone meat, was cooking while the {Greek} or inward parts were beingeaten. I imagine that the thigh bones made a kind of gridiron, while atthe same time the marrow inside them got cooked.][26] [ i.e. skewers, either single, double, or even five pronged. Themeat would be pierced with the skewer, and laid over the ashes togrill—the two ends of the skewer being supported in whatever wayconvenient. Meat so cooking may be seen in any eating house in Smyrna,or any Eastern town. When I rode across the Troad from the Dardanellesto Hissarlik and Mount Ida, I noticed that my dragoman and his men didall our outdoor cooking exactly in the Odyssean and Iliadic fashion.][27] [ cf. “Il.” xvii. 567. {Greek} The Odyssean lines are—{Greek}][28] [ Reading {Greek} for {Greek}, cf. “Od.” i. 186.]29[] [ The geography of the Ægean as above described is correct, but isprobably taken from the lost poem, the Nosti, the existence of which isreferred to “Od.” i. 326, 327 and 350, &c. A glance at the map willshow that heaven advised its supplicants quite correctly.][30] [ The writer—ever jealous for the honour of women—extenuatesClytemnestra’s guilt as far as possible, and explains it as due to herhaving been left unprotected, and fallen into the hands of a wickedman.][31] [ The Greek is {Greek} cf. “Iliad” ii. 408 {Greek} Surely the{Greek} of the Odyssean passage was due to the {Greek} of the “Iliad.”No other reason suggests itself for the making Menelaus return on thevery day of the feast given by Orestes. The fact that in the “Iliad”Menelaus came to a banquet without waiting for an invitation,determines the writer of the “Odyssey” to make him come to a banquet,also uninvited, but as circumstances did not permit of his having beeninvited, his coming uninvited is shown to have been due to chance. I donot think the authoress thought all this out, but attribute thestrangeness of the coincidence to unconscious cerebration andsaturation.][32] [ cf. “Il.” I. 458, II. 421. The writer here interrupts an Iliadicpassage (to which she returns immediately) for the double purpose ofdwelling upon the slaughter of the heifer, and of letting Nestor’s wifeand daughter enjoy it also. A male writer, if he was borrowing from the“Iliad,” would have stuck to his borrowing.][33] [ cf. “Il.” xxiv. 587, 588 where the lines refer to the washingthe dead body of Hector.][34] [ See illustration on opposite page. The yard is typical of manythat may be seen in Sicily. The existing ground-plan is probablyunmodified from Odyssean, and indeed long pre-Odyssean times, but theearlier buildings would have no arches, and would, one would suppose,be mainly timber. The Odyssean {Greek} were the sheds that ran roundthe yard as the arches do now. The {Greek} was the one through whichthe main entrance passed, and which was hence “noisy,” orreverberating. It had an upper story in which visitors were oftenlodged.][35] [ This journey is an impossible one. Telemachus and Pisistratuswould have been obliged to drive over the Taygetus range, over whichthere has never yet been a road for wheeled vehicles. It is plaintherefore that the audience for whom the “Odyssey” was written was onethat would be unlikely to know anything about the topography of thePeloponnese, so that the writer might take what liberties she chose.][36] [ The lines which I have enclosed in brackets are evidently anafterthought—added probably by the writer herself—for they evince thesame instinctively greater interest in anything that may concern awoman, which is so noticeable throughout the poem. There is no furthersign of any special festivities nor of any other guests than Telemachusand Pisistratus, until lines 621-624 (ordinarily enclosed in brackets)are abruptly introduced, probably with a view of trying to carry offthe introduction of the lines now in question.The addition was, I imagine, suggested by a desire to excuse andexplain the non-appearance of Hermione in bk. xv., as also of bothHermione and Megapenthes in the rest of bk. iv. Megapenthes in bk. xv.seems to be still a bachelor: the presumption therefore is that bk. xv.was written before the story of his marriage here given. I take it heis only married here because his sister is being married. She havingbeen properly attended to, Megapenthes might as well be married at thesame time. Hermione could not now be less than thirty.I have dealt with this passage somewhat more fully in my “Authoress ofthe Odyssey”, p. 136-138. See also p. 256 of the same book.][37] [ Sparta and Lacedaemon are here treated as two different places,though in other parts of the poem it is clear that the writerunderstands them as one. The catalogue in the “Iliad,” which the writeris here presumably following, makes the same mistake (“Il.” ii. 581,582)][38] [ These last three lines are identical with “Il.” vxiii. 604-606.][39] [ From the Greek {Greek} it is plain that Menelaus took up thepiece of meat with his fingers.][40] [ Amber is never mentioned in the “Iliad.” Sicily, where I supposethe “Odyssey” to have been written, has always been, and still is, oneof the principal amber producing countries. It was probably the onlyone known in the Odyssean age. See “The Authoress of the Odyssey,”Longmans 1898, p. 186.][41] [ This no doubt refers to the story told in the last poem of theCypria about Paris and Helen robbing Menelaus of the greater part ofhis treasures, when they sailed together for Troy.][42] [ It is inconceivable that Helen should enter thus, in the middleof supper, intending to work with her distaff, if great festivitieswere going on. Telemachus and Pisistratus are evidently dining enfamille.][43] [ In the Italian insurrection of 1848, eight young men who werebeing hotly pursued by the Austrian police hid themselves insideDonatello’s colossal wooden horse in the Salone at Padua, and remainedthere for a week being fed by their confederates. In 1898 the lastsurvivor was carried round Padua in triumph.][44] [ The Greek is {Greek}. Is it unfair to argue that the writer is aperson of somewhat delicate sensibility, to whom a strong smell of fishis distasteful?][45] [ The Greek is {Greek}. I believe this to be a hit at the writer’sown countrymen who were of Phocaean descent, and the next followingline to be a rejoinder to complaints made against her in bk. vi.273-288, to the effect that she gave herself airs and would marry noneof her own people. For that the writer of the “Odyssey” was the personwho has been introduced into the poem under the name of Nausicaa, Icannot bring myself to question. I may remind English readers that{Greek} (i.e. phoca) means “seal.” Seals almost always appear onPhocaean coins.][46] [ Surely here again we are in the hands of a writer of delicatesensibility. It is not as though the seals were stale; they had onlyjust been killed. The writer, however is obviously laughing at her owncountrymen, and insulting them as openly as she dares.][47] [ We were told above (lines 356, 357) that it was only one day’ssail.][48] [ I give the usual translation, but I do not believe the Greekwill warrant it. The Greek reads {Greek}.This is usually held to mean that Ithaca is an island fit for breedinggoats, and on that account more delectable to the speaker than it wouldhave been if it were fit for breeding horses. I find little authorityfor such a translation; the most equitable translation of the text asit stands is, “Ithaca is an island fit for breeding goats, anddelectable rather than fit for breeding horses; for not one of theislands is good driving ground, nor well meadowed.” Surely the writerdoes not mean that a pleasant or delectable island would not be fit forbreeding horses? The most equitable translation, therefore, of thepresent text being thus halt and impotent, we may suspect corruption,and I hazard the following emendation, though I have not adopted it inmy translation, as fearing that it would be deemed too fanciful. Iwould read:—{Greek}.As far as scanning goes the {Greek} is not necessary; {Greek} iv. 72,(Footnote Greek) iv. 233, to go no further afield than earlier lines ofthe same book, give sufficient authority for {Greek}, but the {Greek}would not be redundant; it would emphasise the surprise of thecontrast, and I should prefer to have it, though it is not veryimportant either way. This reading of course should be translated“Ithaca is an island fit for breeding goats, and (by your leave) itselfa horseman rather than fit for breeding horses—for not one of theislands is good and well meadowed ground.”This would be sure to baffle the Alexandrian editors. “How,” they wouldask themselves, “could an island be a horseman?” and they would castabout for an emendation. A visit to the top of Mt. Eryx might perhapsmake the meaning intelligible, and suggest my proposed restoration ofthe text to the reader as readily as it did to myself.I have elsewhere stated my conviction that the writer of the “Odyssey”was familiar with the old Sican city at the top of Mt. Eryx, and thatthe Aegadean islands which are so striking when seen thence did dutywith her for the Ionian islands—Marettimo, the highest and mostwesterly of the group, standing for Ithaca. When seen from the top ofMt. Eryx Marettimo shows as it should do according to “Od.” ix. 25, 26,“on the horizon, all highest up in the sea towards the West,” while theother islands lie “some way off it to the East.” As we descend toTrapani, Marettimo appears to sink on to the top of the island ofLevanzo, behind which it disappears. My friend, the late Signor E.Biaggini, pointed to it once as it was just standing on the top ofLevanzo, and said to me “Come cavalca bene” (“How well it rides”), andthis immediately suggested my emendation to me. Later on I found in thehymn to the Pythian Apollo (which abounds with tags taken from the“Odyssey”) a line ending {Greek} which strengthened my suspicion thatthis was the original ending of the second of the two lines above underconsideration.][49] [ See note on line 3 of this book. The reader will observe thatthe writer has been unable to keep the women out of an interpolationconsisting only of four lines.][50] [ Scheria means a piece of land jutting out into the sea. In my“Authoress of the Odyssey” I thought “Jutland” would be a suitabletranslation, but it has been pointed out to me that “Jutland” onlymeans the land of the Jutes.][51] [ Irrigation as here described is common in gardens near Trapani.The water that supplies the ducts is drawn from wells by a mule whoturns a wheel with buckets on it.][52] [ There is not a word here about the cattle of the sun-god.][53] [ The writer evidently thought that green, growing wood might alsobe well seasoned.][54] [ The reader will note that the river was flowing with salt wateri.e. that it was tidal.][55] [ Then the Ogygian island was not so far off, but that Nausicaamight be assumed to know where it was.][56] [ Greek {Greek}][57] [ I suspect a family joke, or sly allusion to some thing of whichwe know nothing, in this story of Eurymedusa’s having been brought fromApeira. The Greek word “apeiros” means “inexperienced,” “ignorant.” Isit possible that Eurymedusa was notoriously incompetent?][58] [ Polyphemus was also son to Neptune, see “Od.” ix. 412, 529. hewas therefore half brother to Nausithous, half uncle to King Alcinous,and half great uncle to Nausicaa.][59] [ It would seem as though the writer thought that Marathon wasclose to Athens.][60] [ Here the writer, knowing that she is drawing (withembellishments) from things actually existing, becomes impatient ofpast tenses and slides into the present.][61] [ This is hidden malice, implying that the Phaeacian magnates wereno better than they should be. The final drink-offering should havebeen made to Jove or Neptune, not to the god of thievishness andrascality of all kinds. In line 164 we do indeed find Echeneusproposing that a drink-offering should be made to Jove, but Mercury isevidently, according to our authoress, the god who was most likely tobe of use to them.][62] [ The fact of Alcinous knowing anything about the Cyclopessuggests that in the writer’s mind Scheria and the country of theCyclopes were not very far from one another. I take the Cyclopes andthe giants to be one and the same people.][63] [ “My property, etc.” The authoress is here adopting an Iliadicline (xix. 333), and this must account for the absence of all referenceto Penelope. If she had happened to remember “Il.” v. 213, she woulddoubtless have appropriated it by preference, for that line reads “mycountry, _my wife_, and all the greatness of my house.”][64] [ The at first inexplicable sleep of Ulysses (bk. xiii. 79, etc.)is here, as also in viii. 445, being obviously prepared. The writerevidently attached the utmost importance to it. Those who know that theharbour which did duty with the writer of the “Odyssey” for the one inwhich Ulysses landed in Ithaca, was only about 2 miles from the placein which Ulysses is now talking with Alcinous, will understand why thesleep was so necessary.][65] [ There were two classes—the lower who were found in provisionswhich they had to cook for themselves in the yards and outer precincts,where they would also eat—and the upper who would eat in the cloistersof the inner court, and have their cooking done for them.][66] [ Translation very dubious. I suppose the {Greek} here to be thecovered sheds that ran round the outer courtyard. See illustrations atthe end of bk. iii.][67] [ The writer apparently deems that the words “as compared withwhat oxen can plough in the same time” go without saying. Not so thewriter of the “Iliad” from which the Odyssean passage is probablytaken. He explains that mules can plough quicker than oxen (“Il.” x.351-353)][68] [ It was very fortunate that such a disc happened to be there,seeing that none like it were in common use.][69] [ “Il.” xiii. 37. Here, as so often elsewhere in the “Odyssey,”the appropriation of an Iliadic line which is not quite appropriatepuzzles the reader. The “they” is not the chains, nor yet Mars andVenus. It is an overflow from the Iliadic passage in which Neptunehobbles his horses in bonds “which none could either unloose or breakso that they might stay there in that place.” If the line would havescanned without the addition of the words “so that they might staythere in that place,” they would have been omitted in the “Odyssey.”][70] [ The reader will note that Alcinous never goes beyond saying thathe is going to give the goblet; he never gives it. Elsewhere in both“Iliad” and “Odyssey” the offer of a present is immediately followed bythe statement that it was given and received gladly—Alcinous actuallydoes give a chest and a cloak and shirt—probably also some of the cornand wine for the long two-mile voyage was provided by him—but it isquite plain that he gave no talent and no cup.][71] [ “Il.” xviii. 344-349. These lines in the “Iliad” tell of thepreparation for washing the body of Patroclus, and I am not pleasedthat the writer of the “Odyssey” should have adopted them here.][72] [ see note [64] : ][73] [ see note [43] : ][74] [ The reader will find this threat fulfilled in bk. xiii][75] [ If the other islands lay some distance away from Ithaca (whichthe word {Greek} suggests), what becomes of the πόρθμος or gut betweenIthaca and Samos which we hear of in Bks. iv. and xv.? I suspect thatthe authoress in her mind makes Telemachus come back from Pylos to theLilybaean promontory and thence to Trapani through the strait betweenthe _Isola Grande_ and the mainland—the island of Asteria being the oneon which Motya afterwards stood.][76] [ “Il.” xviii. 533-534. The sudden lapse into the third personhere for a couple of lines is due to the fact that the two Iliadiclines taken are in the third person.][77] [ cf. “Il.” ii. 776. The words in both “Iliad” and “Odyssey” are[Footnote Greek]. In the “Iliad” they are used of the horses ofAchilles’ followers as they stood idle, “champing lotus.”][78] [ I take all this passage about the Cyclopes having no ships to besarcastic—meaning, “You people of Drepanum have no excuse for notcolonising the island of Favognana, which you could easily do, for youhave plenty of ships, and the island is a very good one.” For that theisland so fully described here is the Aegadean or “goat” island ofFavognana, and that the Cyclopes are the old Sican inhabitants of Mt.Eryx should not be doubted.][79] [ For the reasons why it was necessary that the night should be soexceptionally dark see “The Authoress of the Odyssey” pp. 188-189.][80] [ None but such lambs as would suck if they were with theirmothers would be left in the yard. The older lambs should have been outfeeding. The authoress has got it all wrong, but it does not matter.See “The Authoress of the Odyssey” p. 148.][81] [ This line is enclosed in brackets in the received text, and isomitted (with note) by Messrs. Butcher & Lang. But lines enclosed inbrackets are almost always genuine; all that brackets mean is that thebracketed passage puzzled some early editor, who nevertheless found ittoo well established in the text to venture on omitting it. In thepresent case the line bracketed is the very last which a full-grownmale editor would be likely to interpolate. It is safer to infer thatthe writer, a young woman, not knowing or caring at which end of theship the rudder should be, determined to make sure by placing it atboth ends, which we shall find she presently does by repeating it (line340) at the stern of the ship. As for the two rocks thrown, the first Itake to be the Asinelli, see map facing p. 80. The second I see as thetwo contiguous islands of the Formiche, which are treated as one, seemap facing p. 108. The Asinelli is an island shaped like a boat, andpointing to the island of Favognana. I think the authoress’scompatriots, who probably did not like her much better that she didthem, jeered at the absurdity of Ulysses’ conduct, and saw the Asinellior “donkeys,” not as the rock thrown by Polyphemus, but as the boatitself containing Ulysses and his men.][82] [ This line exists in the text here but not in the correspondingpassage xii. 141. I am inclined to think it is interpolated (probablyby the poetess herself) from the first of lines xi. 115-137, which Ican hardly doubt were added by the writer when the scheme of the workwas enlarged and altered. See “The Authoress of the Odyssey” pp.254-255.][83] [ “Floating” (πλωτῇ) is not to be taken literally. The islanditself, as apart from its inhabitants, was quite normal. There is noindication of its moving during the month that Ulysses stayed withAeolus, and on his return from his unfortunate voyage, he seems to havefound it in the same place. The πλωτῇ in fact should no more be pressedthan θοῇσι as applied to islands, “Odyssey” xv. 299—where they arecalled “flying” because the ship would fly past them. So also the“Wanderers,” as explained by Buttmann; see note on “Odyssey” xii. 57.][84] [ Literally “for the ways of the night and of the day are near.” Ihave seen what Mr. Andrew Lang says (“Homer and the Epic,” p. 236, and“Longman’s Magazine” for January, 1898, p. 277) about the “amber route”and the “Sacred Way” in this connection; but until he gives his groundsfor holding that the Mediterranean peoples in the Odyssean age used togo far North for their amber instead of getting it in Sicily, where itis still found in considerable quantities, I do not know what weight Iought to attach to his opinion. I have been unable to find grounds forasserting that B.C. 1000 there was any commerce between theMediterranean and the “Far North,” but I shall be very ready to learnif Mr. Lang will enlighten me. See “The Authoress of the Odyssey” pp.185-186.][85] [ One would have thought that when the sun was driving the stagdown to the water, Ulysses might have observed its whereabouts.][86] [ See Hobbes of Malmesbury’s translation.][87] [ “Il.” vxiii. 349. Again the writer draws from the washing thebody of Patroclus—which offends.][88] [ This visit is wholly without topographical significance.][89] [ Brides presented themselves instinctively to the imagination ofthe writer, as the phase of humanity which she found most interesting.][90] [ Ulysses was, in fact, to become a missionary and preach Neptuneto people who knew not his name. I was fortunate enough to meet inSicily a woman carrying one of these winnowing shovels; it was not muchshorter than an oar, and I was able at once to see what the writer ofthe “Odyssey” intended.][91] [ I suppose the lines I have enclosed in brackets to have beenadded by the author when she enlarged her original scheme by theaddition of books i.-iv. and xiii. (from line 187)-xxiv. The readerwill observe that in the corresponding passage (xii. 137-141) theprophecy ends with “after losing all your comrades,” and that there isno allusion to the suitors. For fuller explanation see “The Authoressof the Odyssey” pp. 254-255.][92] [ The reader will remember that we are in the first year ofUlysses’ wanderings, Telemachus therefore was only eleven years old.The same anachronism is made later on in this book. See “The Authoressof the Odyssey” pp. 132-133.][93] [ Tradition says that she had hanged herself. Cf. “Odyssey” xv.355, etc.][94] [ Not to be confounded with Aeolus king of the winds.][95] [ Melampus, vide book xv. 223, etc.][96] [ I have already said in a note on bk. xi. 186 that at this pointof Ulysses’ voyage Telemachus could only be between eleven and twelveyears old.][97] [ Is the writer a man or a woman?][98] [ Cf. “Il.” iv. 521, {Greek}. The Odyssean line reads, {Greek}.The famous dactylism, therefore, of the Odyssean line was probablysuggested by that of the Ileadic rather than by a desire to accommodatesound to sense. At any rate the double coincidence of a dactylic line,and an ending {Greek}, seems conclusive as to the familiarity of thewriter of the “Odyssey” with the Iliadic line.][99] [ Off the coast of Sicily and South Italy, in the month of May, Ihave seen men fastened half way up a boat’s mast with their feetresting on a crosspiece, just large enough to support them. From thispoint of vantage they spear sword-fish. When I saw men thus employed Icould hardly doubt that the writer of the “Odyssey” had seen otherslike them, and had them in her mind when describing the binding ofUlysses. I have therefore with some diffidence ventured to depart fromthe received translation of ἰστοπέδη (cf. Alcaeus frag. 18, where,however, it is very hard to say what ἰστοπέδαν means). In Sophocles’Lexicon I find a reference to Chrysostom (l, 242, A. Ed. BenedictineParis 1834-1839) for the word ἰστοπόδη, which is probably the same asἰστοπέδη, but I have looked for the passage in vain.][100] [ The writer is at fault here and tries to put it off on Circe.When Ulysses comes to take the route prescribed by Circe, he ought topass either the Wanderers or some other difficulty of which we are nottold, but he does not do so. The Planctae, or Wanderers, merge intoScylla and Charybdis, and the alternative between them and somethinguntold merges into the alternative whether Ulysses had better chooseScylla or Charybdis. Yet from line 260, it seems we are to consider theWanderers as having been passed by Ulysses; this appears even moreplainly from xxiii. 327, in which Ulysses expressly mentions theWandering rocks as having been between the Sirens and Scylla andCharybdis. The writer, however, is evidently unaware that she does notquite understand her own story; her difficulty was perhaps due to thefact that though Trapanese sailors had given her a fair idea as towhere all her other localities really were, no one in those days morethan in our own could localise the Planctae, which in fact, as Buttmannhas argued, were derived not from any particular spot, but fromsailors’ tales about the difficulties of navigating the group of theAeolian islands as a whole (see note on “Od.” x. 3). Still the matterof the poor doves caught her fancy, so she would not forgo them. Thewhirlwinds of fire and the smoke that hangs on Scylla suggests allusionto Stromboli and perhaps even Etna. Scylla is on the Italian side, andtherefore may be said to look West. It is about 8 miles thence to theSicilian coast, so Ulysses may be perfectly well told that afterpassing Scylla he will come to the Thrinacian island or Sicily.Charybdis is transposed to a site some few miles to the north of itsactual position.][101] [ I suppose this line to have been intercalated by the authorwhen lines 426-446 were added.][102] [ For the reasons which enable us to identify the island of thetwo Sirens with the Lipari island now Salinas—the ancient Didyme, or“twin” island—see The Authoress of the Odyssey, pp. 195, 196. The twoSirens doubtless were, as their name suggests, the whistling gusts, oravalanches of air that at times descend without a moment’s warning fromthe two lofty mountains of Salinas—as also from all high points in theneighbourhood.][103] [ See Admiral Smyth on the currents in the Straits of Messina,quoted in “The Authoress of the Odyssey,” p. 197.][104] [ In the islands of Favognana and Marettimo off Trapani I haveseen men fish exactly as here described. They chew bread into a pasteand throw it into the sea to attract the fish, which they then spear.No line is used.][105] [ The writer evidently regards Ulysses as on a coast that lookedEast at no great distance south of the Straits of Messina somewhere,say, near Tauromenium, now Taormina.][106] [ Surely there must be a line missing here to tell us that thekeel and mast were carried down into Charybdis. Besides, the aorist{Greek} in its present surrounding is perplexing. I have translated itas though it were an imperfect; I see Messrs. Butcher and Langtranslate it as a pluperfect, but surely Charybdis was in the act ofsucking down the water when Ulysses arrived.][107] [ I suppose the passage within brackets to have been anafterthought but to have been written by the same hand as the rest ofthe poem. I suppose xii. 103 to have been also added by the writer whenshe decided on sending Ulysses back to Charybdis. The simile suggeststhe hand of the wife or daughter of a magistrate who had often seen herfather come in cross and tired.][108] [ Gr. πολυδαίδαλος. This puts coined money out of the question,but nevertheless implies that the gold had been worked into ornamentsof some kind.][109] [ I suppose Teiresias’ prophecy of bk. xi. 114-120 had made noimpression on Ulysses. More probably the prophecy was an afterthought,intercalated, as I have already said, by the authoress when she changedher scheme.][110] [ A male writer would have made Ulysses say, not “may you givesatisfaction to your wives,” but “may your wives give satisfaction toyou.”][111] [ See note [64].][112] [ The land was in reality the shallow inlet, now the salt worksof S. Cusumano—the neighbourhood of Trapani and Mt. Eryx being made todo double duty, both as Scheria and Ithaca. Hence the necessity formaking Ulysses set out after dark, fall instantly into a profoundsleep, and wake up on a morning so foggy that he could not see anythingtill the interviews between Neptune and Jove and between Ulysses andMinerva should have given the audience time to accept the situation.See illustrations and map near the end of bks. v. and vi.respectively.][113] [ This cave, which is identifiable with singular completeness, isnow called the “grotta del toro,” probably a corruption of “tesoro,”for it is held to contain a treasure. See The Authoress of the Odyssey,pp. 167-170.][114] [ Probably they would.][115] [ Then it had a shallow shelving bottom.][116] [ Doubtless the road would pass the harbour in Odyssean times asit passes the salt works now; indeed, if there is to be a road at allthere is no other level ground which it could take. See map abovereferred to.][117] [ The rock at the end of the Northern harbour of Trapani, towhich I suppose the writer of the “Odyssey” to be here referring, stillbears the name Malconsiglio—“the rock of evil counsel.” There is alegend that it was a ship of Turkish pirates who were intending toattack Trapani, but the “Madonna di Trapani” crushed them under thisrock just as they were coming into port. My friend CavaliereGiannitrapani of Trapani told me that his father used to tell him whenhe was a boy that if he would drop exactly three drops of oil on to thewater near the rock, he would see the ship still at the bottom. Thelegend is evidently a Christianised version of the Odyssean story,while the name supplies the additional detail that the disasterhappened in consequence of an evil counsel.][118] [ It would seem then that the ship had got all the way back fromIthaca in about a quarter of an hour.][119] [ And may we not add “and also to prevent his recognising that hewas only in the place where he had met Nausicaa two days earlier.”][120] [ All this is to excuse the entire absence of Minerva from booksix.-xii., which I suppose had been written already, before theauthoress had determined on making Minerva so prominent a character.][121] [ We have met with this somewhat lame attempt to cover thewriter’s change of scheme at the end of bk. vi.][122] [ I take the following from The Authoress of the Odyssey, p. 167.“It is clear from the text that there were two [caves] not one, butsome one has enclosed in brackets the two lines in which the secondcave is mentioned, I presume because he found himself puzzled by havinga second cave sprung upon him when up to this point he had only beentold of one.“I venture to think that if he had known the ground he would not havebeen puzzled, for there are two caves, distant about 80 or 100 yardsfrom one another.” The cave in which Ulysses hid his treasure is, as Ihave already said, identifiable with singular completeness. The othercave presents no special features, neither in the poem nor in nature.][123] [ There is no attempt to disguise the fact that Penelope had longgiven encouragement to the suitors. The only defence set up is that shedid not really mean to encourage them. Would it not have been wiser tohave tried a little discouragement?][124] [ See map near the end of bk. vi. _Ruccazzù dei corvi_ of coursemeans “the rock of the ravens.” Both name and ravens still exist.][125] [ See The Authoress of the Odyssey, pp. 140, 141. The real reasonfor sending Telemachus to Pylos and Lacedaemon was that the authoressmight get Helen of Troy into her poem. He was sent at the only point inthe story at which he could be sent, so he must have gone then or notat all.][126] [ The site I assign to Eumaeus’s hut, close to the _Ruccazzù deicorvi_, is about 2,000 feet above the sea, and commands an extensiveview.][127] [ Sandals such as Eumaeus was making are still worn in theAbruzzi and elsewhere. An oblong piece of leather forms the sole: holesare cut at the four corners, and through these holes leathern strapsare passed, which are bound round the foot and cross-gartered up thecalf.][128] [ See note [75] : ][129] [ Telemachus like many another good young man seems to expectevery one to fetch and carry for him.][130] [ “Il.” vi. 288. The store room was fragrant because it was madeof cedar wood. See “Il.” xxiv. 192.][131] [ cf. “Il.” vi. 289 and 293-296. The dress was kept at the bottomof the chest as one that would only be wanted on the greatestoccasions; but surely the marriage of Hermione and of Megapenthes (bk,iv. _ad init_.) might have induced Helen to wear it on the precedingevening, in which case it could hardly have got back. We find no hinthere of Megapenthes’ recent marriage.][132] [ See note [83].][133] [ cf. “Od.” xi. 196, etc.][134] [ The names Syra and Ortygia, on which island a great part of theDoric Syracuse was originally built, suggest that even in Odysseantimes there was a prehistoric Syracuse, the existence of which wasknown to the writer of the poem.][135] [ Literally “where are the turnings of the sun.” Assuming, as wemay safely do, that the Syra and Ortygia of the “Odyssey” refer toSyracuse, it is the fact that not far to the South of these places theland turns sharply round, so that mariners following the coast wouldfind the sun upon the other side of their ship to that on which they’dhad it hitherto.Mr. A. S. Griffith has kindly called my attention to Herod iv. 42,where, speaking of the circumnavigation of Africa by Phoenicianmariners under Necos, he writes:“On their return they declared—I for my part do not believe them, butperhaps others may—that in sailing round Libya [i.e. Africa] they hadthe sun upon their right hand. In this way was the extent of Libyafirst discovered.“I take it that Eumaeus was made to have come from Syracuse because thewriter thought she rather ought to have made something happen atSyracuse during her account of the voyages of Ulysses. She could not,however, break his long drift from Charybdis to the island ofPantellaria; she therefore resolved to make it up to Syracuse inanother way.”Modern excavations establish the existence of two and only twopre-Dorian communities at Syracuse; they were, so Dr. Orsi informed me,at Plemmirio and Cozzo Pantano. See The Authoress of the Odyssey, pp.211-213.][136] [ This harbour is again evidently the harbour in which Ulysseshad landed, i.e. the harbour that is now the salt works of S.Cusumano.][137] [ This never can have been anything but very niggardly pay forsome eight or nine days’ service. I suppose the crew were to considerthe pleasure of having had a trip to Pylos as a set off. There is notrace of the dinner as having been actually given, either on thefollowing or any other morning.][138] [ No hawk can tear its prey while it is on the wing.][139] [ The text is here apparently corrupt, and will not make sense asit stands. I follow Messrs. Butcher & Lang in omitting line 101.][140] [ i.e. to be milked, as in South Italian and Sicilian towns atthe present day.][141] [ The butchering and making ready the carcases took place partlyin the outer yard and partly in the open part of the inner court.][142] [ These words cannot mean that it would be afternoon soon afterthey were spoken. Ulysses and Eumaeus reached the town which was “someway off” (xvii. 25) in time for the suitor’s early meal (xvii. 170 and176) say at ten or eleven o’ clock. The context of the rest of the bookshows this. Eumaeus and Ulysses, therefore, cannot have started laterthan eight or nine, and Eumaeus’s words must be taken as anexaggeration for the purpose of making Ulysses bestir himself.][143] [ I imagine the fountain to have been somewhere about where thechurch of the _Madonna di Trapani_ now stands, and to have been fedwith water from what is now called the Fontana Diffali on Mt. Eryx.][144] [ From this and other passages in the “Odyssey” it appears thatwe are in an age anterior to the use of coined money—an age whencauldrons, tripods, swords, cattle, chattels of all kinds, measures ofcorn, wine, or oil, etc. etc., not to say pieces of gold, silver,bronze, or even iron, wrought more or less, but unstamped, were thenearest approach to a currency that had as yet been reached.][145] [ Gr. ἐς μέσσον.][146] [ I correct these proofs abroad and am not within reach ofHesiod, but surely this passage suggests acquaintance with the Worksand Ways, though it by no means compels it.][147] [ It would seem as though Eurynome and Euryclea were the sameperson. See note 156][148] [ It is plain, therefore, that Iris was commonly accepted as themessenger of the gods, though our authoress will never permit her tofetch or carry for any one.][149] [ i.e. the doorway leading from the inner to the outer court.][150] [See note 156][151] [ These, I imagine, must have been in the open part of the innercourtyard, where the maids also stood, and threw the light of theirtorches into the covered cloister that ran all round it. The smokewould otherwise have been intolerable.][152] [ Translation very uncertain; vide Liddell and Scott, under{Greek}][153] [ See photo on opposite page.][154] [ cf. “Il.” ii. 184, and 217, 218. An additional and well-markedfeature being wanted to convince Penelope, the writer has taken thehunched shoulders of Thersites (who is mentioned immediately afterEurybates in the “Iliad”) and put them on to Eurybates’ back.][155] [ This is how geese are now fed in Sicily, at any rate in summer,when the grass is all burnt up. I have never seen them grazing.][156] [ Lower down (line 143) Euryclea says it was herself that hadthrown the cloak over Ulysses—for the plural should not be taken asimplying more than one person. The writer is evidently stillfluctuating between Euryclea and Eurynome as the name for the oldnurse. She probably originally meant to call her Euryclea, but findingit not immediately easy to make Euryclea scan in xvii. 495, she hastilycalled her Eurynome, intending either to alter this name later or tochange the earlier Euryclea’s into Eurynome. She then drifted in toEurynome as convenience further directed, still nevertheless hankeringafter Euryclea, till at last she found that the path of leastresistance would lie in the direction of making Eurynome and Eurycleatwo persons. Therefore in xxiii. 289-292 both Eurynome and “the nurse”(who can be none other than Euryclea) come on together. I do not saythat this is feminine, but it is not unfeminine.][157] [ See note [156]][158] [ This, I take it, was immediately in front of the main entranceof the inner courtyard into the body of the house.][159] [ This is the only allusion to Sardinia in either “Iliad” or“Odyssey.”][160] [ The normal translation of the Greek word would be “holdingback,” “curbing,” “restraining,” but I cannot think that the writermeant this—she must have been using the word in its other sense of“having,” “holding,” “keeping,” “maintaining.”][161] [ I have vainly tried to realise the construction of thefastening here described.][162] [ See plan of Ulysses’ house in the appendix. It is evident thatthe open part of the court had no flooring but the natural soil.][163] [ See plan of Ulysses’ house, and note [175].][164] [ i.e. the door that led into the body of the house.][165] [ This was, no doubt, the little table that was set for Ulysses,“Od.” xx. 259.Surely the difficulty of this passage has been overrated. I suppose theiron part of the axe to have been wedged into the handle, or boundsecurely to it—the handle being half buried in the ground. The axewould be placed edgeways towards the archer, and he would have to shoothis arrow through the hole into which the handle was fitted when theaxe was in use. Twelve axes were placed in a row all at the sameheight, all exactly in front of one another, all edgeways to Ulysseswhose arrow passed through all the holes from the first onward. Icannot see how the Greek can bear any other interpretation, the wordsbeing, {Greek}“He did not miss a single hole from the first onwards.” {Greek}according to Liddell and Scott being “the hole for the handle of anaxe, etc.,” while {Greek} (“Od.” v. 236) is, according to the sameauthorities, the handle itself. The feat is absurdly impossible, butour authoress sometimes has a soul above impossibilities.][166] [ The reader will note how the spoiling of good food distressesthe writer even in such a supreme moment as this.][167] [ Here we have it again. Waste of substance comes first.][168] [ cf. “Il.” iii. 337 and three other places. It is strange thatthe author of the “Iliad” should find a little horse-hair so alarming.Possibly enough she was merely borrowing a common form line from someearlier poet—or poetess—for this is a woman’s line rather than aman’s.][169] [ Or perhaps simply “window.” See plan in the appendix.][170] [ i.e. the pavement on which Ulysses was standing.][171] [ The interpretation of lines 126-143 is most dubious, and atbest we are in a region of melodrama: cf., however, i. 425, etc. fromwhich it appears that there was a tower in the outer court, and thatTelemachus used to sleep in it. The ὀρσοθύρα I take to be a door, ortrap door, leading on to the roof above Telemachus’s bed room, which weare told was in a place that could be seen from all round—or it mightbe simply a window in Telemachus’s room looking out into the street.From the top of the tower the outer world was to be told what was goingon, but people could not get in by the ὀρσοθύρα: they would have tocome in by the main entrance, and Melanthius explains that the mouth ofthe narrow passage (which was in the lands of Ulysses and his friends)commanded the only entrance by which help could come, so that therewould be nothing gained by raising an alarm.    As for the ῥῶγες of line 143, no commentator ancient or modern has    been able to say what was intended—but whatever they were,    Melanthius could never carry twelve shields, twelve helmets, and    twelve spears. Moreover, where he could go the others could go    also. If a dozen suitors had followed Melanthius into the house    they could have attacked Ulysses in the rear, in which case, unless    Minerva had intervened promptly, the “Odyssey” would have had a    different ending. But throughout the scene we are in a region of    extravagance rather than of true fiction—it cannot be taken    seriously by any but the very serious, until we come to the episode    of Phemius and Medon, where the writer begins to be at home again.][172] [ I presume it was intended that there should be a hook driveninto the bearing-post.][173] [ What for?][174] [ Gr: {Greek}. This is not {Greek}.][175] [ From lines 333 and 341 of this book, and lines 145 and 146 ofbk. xxi we can locate the approach to the {Greek} with some certainty.][176] [ But in xix. 500-502 Ulysses scolded Euryclea for offeringinformation on this very point, and declared himself quite able tosettle it for himself.][177] [ There were a hundred and eight Suitors.][178] [ Lord Grimthorpe, whose understanding does not lend itself toeasy imposition, has been good enough to write to me about myconviction that the “Odyssey” was written by a woman, and to send meremarks upon the gross absurdity of the incident here recorded. It isplain that all the authoress cared about was that the women should behanged: as for attempting to realise, or to make her readers realise,how the hanging was done, this was of no consequence. The reader musttake her word for it and ask no questions. Lord Grimthorpe wrote:“I had better send you my ideas about Nausicaa’s hanging of the maids(not ‘maidens,’ of whom Froude wrote so well in his ‘Science ofHistory’) before I forget it all. Luckily for me Liddell & Scott havespecially translated most of the doubtful words, referring to this veryplace.“A ship’s cable. I don’t know how big a ship she meant, but it musthave been a very small one indeed if its ‘cable’ could be used to tietightly round a woman’s neck, and still more round a dozen of them ‘ina row,’ besides being strong enough to hold them and pull them all up.“A dozen average women would need the weight and strength of more thana dozen strong heavy men even over the best pulley hung to the roofover them; and the idea of pulling them up by a rope hung anyhow rounda pillar {Greek} is absurdly impossible; and how a dozen of them couldbe hung dangling round one post is a problem which a senior wranglerwould be puzzled to answer... She had better have let Telemachus usehis sword as he had intended till she changed his mind for him.”][179] [ Then they had all been in Ulysses’ service over twenty years;perhaps the twelve guilty ones had been engaged more recently.][180] [ Translation very doubtful—cf. “It.” xxiv. 598.][181] [ But why could she not at once ask to see the scar, of whichEuryclea had told her, or why could not Ulysses have shown it to her?][182] [ The people of Ithaca seem to have been as fond of carping asthe Phaeacians were in vi. 273, etc.][183] [ See note [156]. Ulysses’s bed room does not appear to have beenupstairs, nor yet quite within the house. Is it possible that it was“the domed room” round the outside of which the erring maids were, foraught we have heard to the contrary, still hanging?][184] [ Ulysses bedroom in the mind of the writer is here tooapparently down stairs.][185] [ Penelope having been now sufficiently whitewashed, disappearsfrom the poem.][186] [ So practised a washerwoman as our authoress doubtless knew thatby this time the web must have become such a wreck that it would havegone to pieces in the wash.]A lady points out to me, just as these sheets are leaving my hands,that no really good needlewoman—no one, indeed, whose work or characterwas worth consideration—could have endured, no matter for what reason,the unpicking of her day’s work, day after day for between three andfour years.][187] [ We must suppose Dolius not yet to know that his son Melanthiushad been tortured, mutilated, and left to die by Ulysses’ orders on thepreceding day, and that his daughter Melantho had been hanged. Doliuswas probably exceptionally simple-minded, and his name was ironical. Soon Mt. Eryx I was shown a man who was always called Sonza Malizia or“Guileless”—he being held exceptionally cunning.]*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ODYSSEY ***Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions willbe renamed.Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in theUnited States without permission and without paying copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use partof this license, apply to copying and distributing ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tmconcept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything forcopies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creationof derivative works, reports, performances and research. ProjectGutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you maydo practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protectedby U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademarklicense, especially commercial redistribution.START: FULL LICENSETHE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "ProjectGutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the FullProject Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online atwww.gutenberg.org/license.Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from theperson or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph1.E.8.1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("theFoundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promotingfree access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tmworks in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License whenyou share it without charge with others.1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of any work in anycountry other than the United States.1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any workon which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which thephrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, copied or distributed:  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where  you are located before using this eBook.1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work isderived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "ProjectGutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tmtrademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all worksposted with the permission of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tmLicense terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg-tm License.1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a formatother than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the officialversion posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "PlainVanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic worksprovided that:* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg  Literary Archive Foundation."* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm  works.* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of  receipt of the work.* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager ofthe Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the ProjectGutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, maycontain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Rightof Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further opportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void theremaining provisions.1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works inaccordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tmProject Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donationsfrom people in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm'sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection willremain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page atwww.gutenberg.orgSection 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive FoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state's laws.The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact information can be found at the Foundation's websiteand official page at www.gutenberg.org/contactSection 4. Information about Donations to the Project GutenbergLiterary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive withoutwidespread public support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particularstate visit www.gutenberg.org/donateWhile we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donateSection 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic worksProfessor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the ProjectGutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paperedition.Most people start at our website which has the main PG searchfacility: www.gutenberg.orgThis website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.